nslated now, Levinas expounds Heidegger's B
Time (Sein und Zeit), expressing unreserved admiration for the book that wa
by Levinas when he met Heidegger at Freiburg

"when 1933 was still unth

her still under the influen
masters-first Bergson, then Husserl, then Heidegger; no reason why Levinas
exposition of Heidegger's fundamental ontology should not, in the fullness
mature into a divergent philosophy of ethical responsibility, still indebted to
but critically different 

gger-has been habitually categorized as preoriginal, anteced
l'existence a l'existant and Le temps et l'autre (both of which appeared in 194
purportedly mark the beginning of Levinas's "o

, can itself be understood phenomenologically within the implicit horizon of events
in Europe during the years 1933-45.

, even God can measure its extent only by traversing it himself.
At the heart of Levinas's critique of Heidegger is the reproof that the question of man
has become submerged in the question of being, and thus that the recovery of the meaning
of being entails the forgetting of the meaning of the human. 

, De l'existence i l'existant,
from existence to the existent-denoting a sense of direction, lost needlessly in Lingis's
translation of the title as Existence and Existents

The anonymity of the ily a is "saved"


nd the subject deposed rather than posed [El 50]. "I am wary of that
debased word 'love,"' 


One could scarcely ask for a more explicit derangement of fundamental ontology, in the
light of a horror of the ily a which had become historically incarnated for him: "None of
the generosity which the German counterpart of the 'there is,' the 'es gibt,' is said to
contain was displayed between 1933 and 1945," he writes later [DL 375]. T


Levinas contests the notion that nothingness is a privation of being
and that evil is a privation of the good, insisting that evil itself is a positive mode of being.

. In an insightful essay
on the philosophy of Hitlerism, published in 1934, Levinas acknowledges a radical and
progressive message in its identification of subjecthood with consanguinity 

" he says, "no longer is found in freedom, but in a sort ofbondage" [

    he truth of freedom in bonds of servitude to the people
though labor service (Arbeitsdienst), to the nation through defense service (Wehrdienst),
and to the German Geist through knowledge service 

 bondage has hitherto been understood
as privation of a liberty that is essentially abstract and demattere

st. The boundedness of the phenomenological horizon is a freedom
realized in the bonds of an inescapable destiny and "innermost necessity.

. By contrast, to place the human subject at the center of existence is
to render humanity sovereign and it is to legitimate this claim to self-presence in the name
of metaphysical abstraction-freedom, rationality, whatever. But to posit being as
essential, which "gives" (es gibt) or grants its truth to man [Brief25], is to decenter man
and humanism, as they are conceived by idealism and traditional religion. "Man is in
thrownness.... Man is not the lord of be-ings. Man is the shepherd of being itself..... He
attains the essential poverty of the shepherd, whose dignity is grounded in being called
by being itself into the preservation of the truth of being" [Brief 32

irties-Levinas's 1932 essay
on Heidegger, Heidegger's 1933 Rectoral Address, and Levinas's 1934 essay on
Hitlerism-share a consanguinity of their own. By 1947, the texts are estranged, pursuing
their blood feud. 

ct, a skeptical subject, or a voluntarist subject, but a
concrete subject, radically situated: "Thus along with the concept of Dasein, the inner
illumination .., becomes inseparable from the destiny and history of concrete man; both
amount to the same thing. It is concrete man who appears at the center of philosophy"
["MH" 24]. The quotation is a crucial one. Back in 1932, Levinas saw in Heidegger's
philosophy the primacy of concrete man. Such "humanism" is reinforced throughout the
essay, as, for example, when he remarks on "the central place of man in philosophical
inquiry" ["MH" 15] and on how it is the "study of man" ["MH" 16] which reveals for us
the horizon in which being is situated. The essay abounds-more, for that matter, than
does Being and Time itself-with assertions of the priority of man to being, and it
delineates a primary distinction between human being and "brute, inert th

. Fundamental ontology, precisely because it does not go beyond the
assertion of self-presence, or at least of self-coming-to-presence, fails to grasp its own
possibility as a philosophy of difference. The stark anonymity of being, precisely because
it is anonymous, covertly sanctions the self's naked will to power and its concomitant
usurpation of the other

In contrast, the nomadic
wanderings of Abraham, the ceaseless venturing into exteriority, tracks the movement of
the philosophy of difference, that is, of ethics. Levinas's quest for a way of Dasein to be
in order to pass beyond the return to its origin is captured in a favorite phrase of his by
Pascal, from which we entitle our essay: "My place in the sun marks the beginning of all
usurpation.

g the self and the other as related side
by side, mediated through a third common term-the truth of being [TA 18-19]. In
contrast, Levinas posits the relation of the face to face, that is, between two, and with no
third term, no external authority. Once three are involved, we enter the universe of the one
and the many and, hence, of "the totalizing discourse of ontology" [Kearney 57-58]. Only
in the ethical relation of two can the self encounter the other immediately without recourse
to an anonymous and faceless collectivity. Describing ethics as a "meontology"

h. It ushered in a philosophy of
identity based on bonds and on consanguinity without fully confronting the advent of
otherness in the epiphany of the human face. 


y. From as early as the essay
translated here, but repeated often, Levinas prophesied that the advent of fundamental
ontology was of historic moment, and that philosophy after Heidegger could never be
innocent again. Alongside the Jews, Enlightenment rationalism also perished in the
Holocaust. With the Holocaust, the Jew (re)entered history; after two millennia of being
represented as the great refusers of the present, as atavists of the Old Law, left behind by
the New, the Jew now became contemporaneous. 

The body, once an obstacle to the exercise of pure philosophy, is now indispensable
to ontology, for with the body and its pulse, we keep time. In his 1947 Le temps et l'autre,
Levinas recognizes the intrinsic relation of time and body to be

 utter. No longer a matter
of contemplation, belief, or of choice, being, for an entire people, was untransferable; nor
was it simply escaped by death. It is this experience of irremissible necessity, of anan-
ke, of the impossibility of flight or refuge, which characterizes the experience of Jewish
being.

rvance. While insisting that the
possibility of elemental evil must remain as the very ground of righteousness, Levinas
sees in fundamental ontology an effete proneness to be seduced by its own capacity for
evil, ascribing such proclivity to the vaingloriousness of Christianity's long fascination
with the temptation of temptation itsel

yolk / yoke

 Yet both
Heidegger's ontological and Levinas's ethical vocabulary are boldly religious, reminding
us of the etymology of the word religio as a "yoking together." For Levinas, we are
essentially creaturely in that creatio ex nihilo defines the moment of absolute alterity, in
which "the self as a creature is envisaged in a passivity more passive still than the passivity
of matter itself' [AE 145, o

. Possibility, in its purest sense, and as end in
itself, defines this sense of bondage, as in obligation as well as religion. For Heidegger,
the concrete body and blood are religious. Consanguinity is, then, fundamentally a
"religious" concept, in this special sense, rather than an accident of biology. An

They are both farthest from and nearest to each other. In swearing his covenant to
Abraham, God becomes the god of the father Abraham, the god of the immediate blood
forefathe

entifies, in his 1990 prefatory letter, q

5]. So what then constitutes the difference
for Levinas between fundamental ontology, which contains within it the possibility of
elemental evil, and ethics as first philosophy? In itself, possibility not only inhabits being
but also Levinas's ethical imperative, a

 This speaks of the apocalyptic nature of alterity, for the
caress of the face and the kiss of Judas cannot be safely told apart from each other. Th

t. We are related
to our possibilities not disinterestedly but in terms of a destiny that is an-archic, in that its
governing principle is the possibility for being other than it is, for being its own other.
Possibility, in its fullest sense, is the possibility of alterity itself.


Levinas saw that consanguinity as metaphor of identity (rather, as something more
literal than metaphor) went far enough to introduce the body as the very condition of
philosophizing-if we can still even use the term, so identified is it with speculation and
mere theorizing. As he posed the problem back in 1934: "What remains of materialism
when matter has been completely pervaded by reason?" The caricature of consanguinity,
as realized within National Socialism, stopped short of alterity, by banishing alterity to
the enemy outside of itself. How, we must ask, can the body--now ground of identity-
contain within it the possibility of alterity? The images of alterity offered by National
Socialism-that of the bodily enemy and the Jew, the Slav, the communist, the homo-
sexual-all requiring conquest or extermination, return one to Aryan sameness. This
glorification of war is the ultimate image of "totality"-Levinas's key term fo


. For Levinas, the most radical
possibility of alterity is to be found in the face of one's neighbor rather than one's enemy.

. The relation between the self and the other is fundamentally asymmetrical and
nonreciprocal. T

 In this, all are called
to be homo Israelis

er? Levinas would insist that obligation, categorical
and unconditional, always precedes thaumazein, and alone puts us in touch with the
difference of difference-and-nondiffer


er, Heidegger quotes a fragment from Herakleitos, as
dear to him as Pascal's was for Levinas: ithos anthropdi daim6n (paraphrased by
Heidegger as: "Man dwells, inasmuch as he is man, in the nearness of the god") [Bri