
8 ex-cendence
: an ex-cendence. But excendence and the Good necessarily have a foothold in being,
and that is why Being is better than non-being.

These studies begun before the war were continued and written down for the most part in
captivity. The stalag is evoked here not as a guarantee of profundity nor as a claim to indulgence,
but as an explanation for the absence of any consideration of those philosophical works
published, with so much impact, between 1940 and 1945.

8 substance
These studies begun before the war were continued and written down for the most part in
captivity. The stalag is evoked here not as a guarantee of profundity nor as a claim to indulgence,
but as an explanation for the absence of any consideration of those philosophical works
published, with so much impact, between 1940 and 1945.

9 
hypostasis 

philosophical problematic


These studies begun before the war were continued and written down for the most part in
captivity. The stalag is evoked here not as a guarantee of profundity nor as a claim to indulgence,
but as an explanation for the absence of any consideration of those philosophical works
published, with so much impact, between 1940 and 1945.

This work will be structured as follows: it sets out to approach the idea of Being in general in its
impersonality so as to then be able to analyze the notion of the present and of position, in which a
being, a subject, an existent, arises in impersonal Being, though a hypostasis. But these issues did
not just arise by themselves. They seem to us to ensue from certain positions of contemporary
ontology which have made possible the renewal of the philosophical problematic.

The evil in Being, the evil of matter in idealist philosophy becomes the
evil of Being

9-10
 which is only possible as an ecstasy toward the end. It
consequently situates the tragic element in existence in this finitude and in the nothingness into
which man is thrown insofar as he exists. Anxiety, a comprehension of nothingness, is a
comprehension of Being only inasmuch as Being itself is determined by nothingness. A
being without anxiety would be an infinite being — but that concept is self-contradictory.
The dialectic of being and nothingness continues to dominate Heideggerian ontology
where evil is always defect, that is, deficiency, lack of being: nothingness.


10
le fait que il y a 
FAIRE -- fact
AVOIR - To have


We shall try to contest the idea that evil is defect. Does Being contain no other vice than
its limitation and nothingness? Is there some sort of underlying evil in its very positivity?

We shall call it
the fact that there is. I


11 - 2
For man is able to take up an attitude with regard to his very existence. Already in what is
called the struggle for life, over and beyond the things capable of satisfying our needs
which that struggle intends to acquire, there is the objective of existence itself, bare
existence, the possibility of pure and simple existence becoming an objective. There is in
the struggle for life and in the primacy this concept has acquired for the interpretation of
life a break with the traditional conception of the relationship between what exists and its
existence. This concept, supported by the development of biological science in the 19th
century, has had an incalculable influence on the whole of contemporary philosophy.
Now life figures as the prototype of the relationship between an existent and existence.
Hitherto a being was taken to have been given existence by divine decree, or to have it by
virtue of its very essence; its existence thus was taken to belong to it in a natural and
quasi-imperceptible fashion. The new and fundamental idea is that this belongingness is
the very struggle for life.

But the notion of the struggle for existence is not enough to grasp the relationship of an
existent with its existence as deeply as we would like

. It is not a continual birth,
understood as a distinct operation by which an existent takes over its existence, apart
from what it may do to conserve it. To see the

We must then try to grasp that event of birth in phenomena which are prior to reflection.

 attribute of their psychic substance, an intention of refusal, a refusing
thought. It is to 

12

INtension of REfusal


13
But the movement we see in weariness by which an existent takes up its existence in the
hesitation of a refusal, a movement which thus expresses the peculiar relationship one has
with existence — birth as a relationship — must not be confused with a judgment.

. It occurs after the intention has been formulated. As in William
James' famous example, it lies between the clear duty of getting up and the putting of the
foot down off the bed.

 The job does not flow does not catch on, is discontinuous — a
discontinuousness which is perhaps the very nature of "a job."


Games also begin, but their beginnings lack seriousness. They are levity itself. One can
drop them at any moment. A game is made up of gestures, movements, decisions and
feelings — so many acts which begin, but its reality qua game is enacted above that basis,
and is essentially made of unreality. That is why theatre has always been interpreted as a
game — and it is striking that that is never said about a poem or a painting. It is a reality
that leaves no traces; the nothingness that preceded it is equal to that which follows it. Its
events do not have real time. A game has no history. It is a paradoxical kind of existence
which is not prolonged into a having. In a game an instant is, but does not hold on to
itself, does not sustain a relationship of possession with itself. It has nothing, and does not
leave anything behind after it vanishes


15
ly. It does not merge with its shadow with the innocence of Narcissus
espousing his own image, but through its shadow learns of its want of innocence. Little
John the simpleton, simple or innocent, in the Russian folktale, tossed the lunch, which
he was to carry to his father at work in the field, to his shadow, so as to slip away from it;
but after he had dropped everything his shadow, like a last and unalienable possession,
still clings to him.

Existence drags behind it a weight — if only itself — which complicates the trip it takes.
Burdened with itself — omnia sua secum portans — it does not have the serene calm of a
sage of old. It does not purely and simply exist. Its movement of existence which might
be pure and straightforward is bent and caught up in itself, showing that the verb to be is
a reflexive verb: it is not just that one is, one is oneself [on s'est].

16
being and having

To clarify the connection we have caught sight of between being and action when we found a
"one has to be" at the bottom of the "one has to do," and when the beginning of an action seemed
to contain the fundamental structure of existence doubling up into being and having and
succumbing under the burden of its having, we have to go further in the analysis of fatigue.


18
The duration of effort is made up entirely of stops. It is in this sense that it follows the work being
done step by step.

19 hypostasis having and being
If the present is thus constituted by the taking charge of the present, if the time-lag of fatigue
creates the interval in which the event of the present can occur, and if this event is equivalent to
the upsurge of an existent for which to be means to take up being, the existence of an existent is
by essence an activity. An existent must be in act, even when it is inactive. This activity of
inactivity is not a paradox; it is the act of positing oneself on ground, it is rest inasmuch
as rest is not a pure negation but this very tension of a position, the bringing about of a
here. The fundamental activity of rest, foundation, conditioning, thus appears to be the
very relationship with being, the upsurge of an existent into existence, a hypostasis. This
entire essay intends only to draw out the implications of this fundamental situation.

19-20 sandy 
This is at the bottom of Baudelaire's profound meditation on skeletons
digging. Existence seems to him to be both irremediably eternal and doomed to pain: unceasingly,
alas, we shall perhaps have to upturn the stony soil in some unknown land and to push at the
heavy spade with our naked and bleeding foot.

20
. I am terribly sincere. No ulterior references, indicating a
relationship of the desirable with the adventure of existence, with bare existence, take
form behind the desirable qua desirable. Of course we do not live in order to eat, but it is
not really true to say that we eat in order to live; we eat because we are hungry

rabelais
This is a joy that is not due to the "quality" or "psychological character" of this or
that desire, nor to its degree of intensity, nor to the charm of the slight excitement which
accompanies it — but to the fact that the world is given. The world, offers the bountifulness of
terrestrial nourishment to our intentions — including those of Rabelais; the world where youth is
happy and restless with desire is the world itself. It takes form not in an additional quality
inhering in objects, but in a destination inscribed in its revelation, in the revelation itself, in the
light Objects are destined for me; they are for me. Desire as a relationship with the world
involves both a distance between me and the desirable, and consequently a time ahead of me, and
also a possession of the desirable which is prior to the desire. This position of the desirable,
before and after the desire, is the fact that it is given. And the fact of being given is the world.

22
a sort of ex-extraterritoriality

 When we say of someone that he has character or a nature of his
own, that he "is a man,"

23
 He will say that Prince Hamlet is deranged, and will not
analyze the personage any further, for one is not obliged to rave along with the mad.

There is then a regrettable confusion in contemporary philosophy when it situated within the
world the events which it has the incontestable merit of having discovered and designated by the
purely negative term of the unconscious, and when it denounced as a hypocrisy, a fall, as
"bourgeois," and evasion of the essential behavior in the world, whose secular nature and
contentment are simply counterparts of the very destiny of the world. It is one thing to ask what
the place of the world in the ontological; adventure is, and another thing to look for that
adventure within the world itself.


In the effort to separate the notion of the world from the notion of a sum of objects we certainly
see one of the most profound discoveries of Heideggerian philosophy. But in order to describe
being-in-the-world, this German philosopher has appealed to an ontological finality, to which he
subordinates objects in the world. Seeing objects as "material" — in the sense that we speak of
"war material" — he has included them in the care for existing, which for him is the very putting
of the ontological problem. But he has thereby failed to recognize the essentially secular nature of
being in the world and the sincerity of intentions.

Let us take some time to look at the example of food; it is significant for us because of the place it
occupies in everyday life, but especially because of the relationship between desire and its
satisfaction which it represents, and which constitutes what is typical of life in the world. What
characterizes this relationship is a complete correspondence between desire and its satisfaction.
Desire knows perfectly well what it wants. And food makes possible the full realization of its
intention. At some moment everything is consummated. Compare eating with loving, which
occurs beyond economic activity and the world. For what characterizes love is an essential and
insatiable hunger. To shake hands with a friend is to express one's friendship for him, but it is to
convey that friendship as something inexpressible, and indeed as something unfulfilled, a
permanent desire. The very positivity of love lies in its negativity. The burning bush that feeds the
flames is not consumed. The trouble one feels before the beloved does not only precede what we
call, in economic terms, possession, but is felt in the possession too. In the random agitation of
caresses there is the admission that access is impossible, violence fails, possession is refused.
There is also the ridiculous and tragic simulation of devouring in kissing and love-bites

 But eating, by
contrast, is peaceful and simple; it fully realizes its sincere intention: "The man who is
eating is the most just of men."

25
Note the writers mentioned -- Rimbaud, Rabelais

25
compromised by things, it is to close one's eyes to the lies of
capitalist idealism and to the evasions in eloquence and the opiate which it offers. The
great force of Marxist philosophy, which takes its point of departure in economic man,
lies in its ability to avoid completely the hypocrisy of sermons. It situates itself in the
perspective of the sincerity of intentions, the good will of hunger and thirst, and the ideal
of struggle and sacrifice it proposes, the culture to which it invites us, is but the
prolongation of these intentions. What can be captivating in Marxism is not its alleged
materialism, but the essential sincerity this proposal and invitation maintain. It is beyond
the always possible suspicion that casts its shadow over every idealism which is not
rooted in the simplicity and univocity of intentions. One does not attribute to it the second
thoughts of deceivers, dupes, or the sated.

. What comes from the outside
illuminated is comprehended, that is, comes from ourselves.

26-7 inversion
f. What comes from the outside
illuminated is comprehended, that is, comes from ourselves.

Light makes possible, then, this enveloping of the exterior by the inward,

The antithesis of the a priori and the a posteriori, like that of
contemplation and desire, is overcome in the moment of light

f the fact of being conscious, being
experiences, being thoughts in the Cartesian sense. Empiricism, in locating the origin of
cognition in sensation, remains faithful to this identification of mentality with knowing


29
ery event of a hypostasis.

Even the most realistic art gives this character of alterity to the objects represented which
are nonetheless part of our world. It presents them to us in their nakedness, that real
nakedness which is not absence of clothing, but we might say the absence of forms, that
is, the nontransmutation of our exteriority into inwardness, which forms realize. The
forms and colors of a painting do not cover over but uncover the things in themselves,


30 sensation sensation -- detaching quality from the object reference 
f. The movement of art consists in
leaving the level of perception so as to reinstate sensation, in detaching the quality from
this object reference. Instead of arriving at the object, the intention gets lost in the
sensation itself, and it is this wandering about in sensation, in aisthesis, that produces the
aesthetic effect

The organization or the anarchy of sensation does not affect its objectivity or subjectivity.


31  
EX exoticism exceptional 
exceptional aesthetics, the particular
Reality is posited in them in its
exotic nakedness as a worldless reality, arising from a shattered world.

Effects of the same kind are obtained in cinema with close-ups. Their interest does not
only lie in that they can show details; they stop the action in which a particular is bound
up with a whole, and let it exist apart. They let it manifest its particular and absurd nature
which the camera discovers in a normally unexpected perspective — in a shoulder line to
which the close-up gives hallucinatory dimensions, laying bare what the visible universe
and the play of its normal proportions tone down and conceal.

We come to understand in this way the quest of modern painting and poetry, which
attempt to preserve the exocitism in artistic reality, to banish from it that soul to which
the visible forms were subjected, and to remove from represented objects their servile
function as expressions. 

32 sinsiter es gibt sinister There Is , Es Gibt.  Look at Giving 
consummation holocaust adding everything up together
n. Behind the luminosity of
forms, by which being already relate to our "inside," matter is the very fact of the there is

 yet inextinguishable "consummation" of being, which murmurs in the depths
of nothingness itself we shall designate by the term there is

33 nameless
The anonymous current of being invades,
submerges every subject, person or thing. T

 It is not the dialectical
counterpart of absence, and we do not grasp it through thought. It is immediately there.
There is no discourse. Nothing responds to us, but this silence; the voice of this silence
understood and frightens like the silence of those infinite spaces Pascal speaks of. There
is, in general, without it mattering there is, without our being able to fix a substantive to
this term. There is is an impersonal form, like in it rains, or it is warm. Its anonymity is
essential. The mind does not find itself faced with an apprehended exterior. The exterior
— if one insists on the term — remains uncorrelated with an interior. It is no long given.
It is no longer a world. What we call the I is itself submerged by the night, invaded,
depersonalized, stifled by it. The disappearance of all things and of the I leaves what
cannot disappear, the sheer fact of being in which one participates whether one wants to
or not, without having taken the initiative, anonymously. Being remains, like a field of
forces, like a heavy atmosphere belonging to no one, universal, returning in the midst of
the negation which put it aside, and in all the powers to which that negation may be
multiplied

 illustrate Professor Mosch Turpin's thesis, in the Tales
of Hoffman, that night

34
. Like the unreal, inverted city we
find after an exhausting trip, things and beings strike us as though they no longer
composed a world, and were swimming in the chaos of their existence. Such is also the
case with the "fantastic," "hallucinatory" reality in poets like Rimbaud, even when they
name the most familiar things and the most accustomed being

35

they take as a natural fact. In horror a subject is
stripped of his subjectivity, of his power to have private existence. The subject is
depersonalized. "Nausea," as a feeling for existence, is not yet a depersonalization; but
horror turns the subjectivity of the subject, his particularity qua entity, inside out. It is a
participation in the there is, in the there is which returns in the heart of every negation, in
the there is that has "no exits." It is, if we may say so, the impossibility of death, the
universality of existence even in its annihilation.

To kill, like to die, is to seek an escape from being, to go where freedom and negation
operate. Horror is the event of being which returns in the heart of this negation, as though
nothing had happened. "And that," says Macbeth, "is more strange than the crime itself."
In the nothingness which a crime creates a being is condensed to the point of suffication,
[sic] and draws consciousness out of its "retreat." A corpse is horrible; it already bears in
itself its own phantom, it presages its return. The haunting spectre, the phantom,
constitutes the very element of horror.

35-6
Specters, ghosts, sorceresses are not only a tribute Shakespeare pays to his time, or
vestiges of the original material he composed with; they allow him to move constantly
toward this limit between being and nothingness where being insinuates itself even in
nothingness, like bubbles of the earth ("the Earth hath bubbles"). Hamlet recoils before
the "not to be" because he has a foreboding of the return of being ("to dye, to sleepe,
perchance to Dreame"). In Macbeth, the apparition of Banquo's ghost is also a decisive
experience of the "no exit" from existence, its phantom return through the fissures
through which one has driven it. "The times have been, that when the Brains were out,
the man would dye, and there an end; But now they rise again ... and push us from our
stools. This is more strange than such a murther is." "And it is over with" is impossible.
The horror does not come from the danger. "What man dare, I dare ... Approach thou like
the rugged Russian Bear, ... Take any shape but that, and my firm Nerves shall never
tremble ... Hence horrible Shadow, unreal mockery hence ... " It is the shadow of being
that horrifies Macbeth; the profile of being takes form in nothingness. The horror of the
night, as an experience of the there is, does not then reveal to us a danger of death, nor
even a danger of pain. That is what is essential in this analysis. The pure nothingness
revealed by anxiety in Heidegger's analysis does not consitute the there is. There is horror
of being and not anxiety over nothingness, fe

There my father holds the urn of doom ...

37 nagarjuna
. Darkness, as the presence of absence, is not a purely
present content. There is not a "something" that remains. There is the atmosphere of
presence, which can, to be sure, appear later as a content, but originally is the impersonal,
non-substantive event of the night and the there is. It is like a density of the void, like a
murmur of silence. There is nothing, but there is being, like a field of forces. Darkness is the
very play of existence which would play itself out even if there were nothing. It is to express just
this paradoxical existence that we have introduced the term "there is." We want to call attention to
this being a density, an atmosphere, a field, which is not to be identified with an object that would
have this density, or that would be taken up in the breath of existence or situated within a field of
forces. We want to call attention to the existential density of the void itself, devoid of all being,
empty even of void, whatever be the power of negation applied to itself. Negation does not end
up with being as a structure and organization of objects; that which affirms and imposes itself in
the extreme situation we have imagined, and which we approach in the night and in the tragic, is
being as an impersonal field, a field without proprietor or master, where negation, annihilation
and nothingness are events like affirmation, creation and subsistence, but impersonal events. A
presence of absence, the there is is beyond contradiction; it embraces and dominates its
contradictory. In this sense being has no outlets.


38
that it is an experience of
nothingness, but that it is as anonymous as the night itself. Attention presupposes the freedom of
the ego which directs it; the vigilance of insomnia which keeps our eyes open has no subject. It is
the very return of presence into the void left by absence — not the return of some thing, but of a
presence; it is the reawakening of the there is in the heart of negation. It is an indefectibility of
being, where the work of being never lets up; it is its insomnia. The consciousness of a thinking
subject, with its capacity for evanescence, sleep and unconsciousness, is precisely the breakup of
the insomnia of anonymous being, the possibility to "suspend," to escape from this corybantic
necessity, to take refuge in oneself so as to withdraw from being, to, like Penelope, have a night
to oneself to undo the work looked after and supervised during the day. The there is, the play of
being, is not played out across oblivions, does not encase itself in sleep like a dream. Its very
occurrence consists in an impossibility, an opposition to possibilities of sleep, relaxation

hallucinations of levinas insomnia
We can be more or less close to this limit situation. In certain awakenings of delirium, in certain
paradoxes of madness, we can surprise this impersonal "consciousness" into which insomnia
sinks. The fatality of these strange states, which it is impossible to recount, is due to the fact that
they do not happen to me as their subject. Their stranglehold has already been loosened, in spite
of the annoyance or pain which can persist, the moment I can take these states as happening to
me, that I catch sight of a subject for them. Their impersonality is the exact contrary of an
unconsciousness; it is due to the absence of a master, to being that belongs to no one.

39 opposition
y. Consciousness, in its opposition to the unconscious, is not constituted by the
opposition, but by this proximity, this communication with its contrary: in its very élan
consciousness becomes fatigued and interrupts itself, has a recourse against itself. Its very
intentionality can be described as an egress into an underlying depth, as that power which
Jules Romains' poet Vorge called the power of "getting the hell out from the inside." 

Thought, which idealism has accustomed us to locate outside of space, is — essentially,
and not as the result of a fall or degradation —

40 standing
 There is not only a consciousness of localization, but a
localization of consciousness, which is not in turn reabsorbed into consciousness, into
knowing. There is here something that stands out against knowing, that is a condition for
knowing. T

41
Consciousness "has" a base, it "has" a place. This is the only sort of having that is not
encumbering, but is a condition: consciousness is here. Th

 Emotion is a way of holding on while losing
one's base. All emo

The latter already
implies the world. The here we are starting with, the here of position, precedes every act
of understanding, every horizon and all time. It

 A subject's immobility, its steadiness, is not the
result of an invariable reference to some coordinates of ideal space, but of its stance, the
event of its position, which refers only to itself and is the origin of fixity in general — the
beginning of the very notion of beginning

42
. It is not situated in a space given beforehand; it is the irruption in anonymous
being of localization itself.

an experience of materiality.

The body has of course always been taken to be more than a chunk of matter. It

m, takes place in consciousness as position. But position is the
very event of the instant as a present. If, with an already ancient philosophical tradition,
one envisages the present within time, it appears as the very evanescence of being. Y

The present is an ignorance
of history. In it the infinity of time or of eternity is interrupted and starts up again. The
present is then a situation in being where there is not only being in general, but there is a
being, a subject. Because the present refers only to itself, starts with itself, it refracts the
future. Its evanescence, its swoon, is something that belongs to its very notion. If it lasted,
it would make a legacy of itself. It would already have derived its being from a heritage
and not from itself. It thus can have no continuity. Its evanescence is the ransom paid for
its subjectivity, that is, for the transmutation, within the pure event of being, of an event
into a substantive — a hypostasis. Of itself time resists any hypo-stasis; the images of
current and flux with which we explain it are applicable to beings in time, and not to time
itself. Time does not flow like a river. But the present brings about the exceptional
situation where we can give to an instant a name, and conceive it as a substantive. Not by
an abuse of language, but in virtue of an ontological transmutation, an essential
equivocation. An instant's "halt" is not to be looked for like an expanse of immobilized
time, whose duration a scientific psychology would be able to measure from behind. The
present is a halt, not because it is arrested,

But this superiority
of eternity is due precisely to the fact that time does not gnaw away at i

44
 The instant in which existence is both born and dies is followed by an
instant in which existence is born, which inherits its legacy.

. It is the continual laying down of the following instant, which is
always assured, that assumes this function

The theory of continuous creation in Descartes and Malebranche refers, on the
phenomenal level, to the incapacity of an instant to join up itself with the following
instant

Here Malebranche
catches sight of the drama inherent in an instant itself, its struggle for existence, 


45 birth
. Each instant is a beginning, a birth. Keeping to the strictly
phenomenal level and leaving aside the transcendent relationship that Malebranche
perceives in the instant, it remains that of itself an instant is a relationship, a conquest,
although this relationship does not refer to any future or past, nor to any being or event
situated in that past or future. An instant qua beginning and birth is a relationship sui
generis, a relationship with and initiation into Being.

45 ab-solute weight and mastery
What is absolute in the relationship between existence and an existent, in an
instant, consists in the mastery the existent exercises on existence, but also in the weight
of existence on the existent.


46 
What is essential is an instant is its stance. Yet this stop harbors an event.

That is not to define the present by the present, but to
catch sight of a relationship with itself in the present. The present refers only to itself, but
this reference, which should have dazzled it with freedom, imprisons it in an
identification. The present, free with respect to the past, but a captive of itself, breathes
the gravity of being in which it is caugh

The return of the present to itself is the affirmation of the already riveted to itself, already
doubled up with a self. The tragic does not come from a conflict between freedom and
destiny, but from the turning of freedom into destiny, from responsibility. The present —
the occurrence of an origin — turns into a being. From there results the essential
ambiguity of the "I"; it is, but remains unclassifiable as an object. It is neither a thing, nor
a spiritual center from which radiate the acts of consciousness, given to the consciousness
of a new "I" which would apprehend it in a new move of withdrawal.

id-entity:  entity of the id c. 1600, "sameness, oneness, state of being the same," from Middle French identité (14c.), from Medieval Latin identitatem (nominative identitas) "sameness," ultimately from Latin idem (neuter) "the same" (see idem). [For discussion of Latin formation, see entry in OED.] Earlier form of the word in English was idemptitie (1560s), from Medieval Latin idemptitas. Term identity crisis first recorded 1954. Identity theft attested from 1995. Identity politics is attested by 1987.


first person, postion of instant
. But at the same time the personal
form of the cogito, the "I" of the "I think," imposes that certainty. The cogito is not a
meditation on the essence of thought, but the inward relationship between the ego and its
act, the unique relationship of the “I” with a verb in the first person form. 

48
This self-reference of the present instant is possible through a stance taken at a site. 

The act of taking position
does not transcend itself. This effort which does not transcend itself constitutes the
present or the "I". To the notion of existence, where the emphasis is put on the first
syllable, we are opposing the notion of a being whose very advent is a folding back upon
itself, a being which, contrary 

EX 
Without being cognition, temporality in Heidegger is an ecstasy, a
"being outside of oneself." This is not the transcendence characteristic of theory, but it is
already the leaving of an inwardness for an exteriority. In Heidegger existence remains a
movement of the inside toward the outside; indeed it is he who has grasped, in its deepest
form, the ultimate and universal essence of this play of inwardness and exteriority,
beyond the "subject-object" play to which idealist and realist philosophy reduced it. What
is new in this conception is that this ecstasy is seen to be more than a property of the soul;
it is taken to be that through which existence exists. It is not a relationship with an object,
but with the verb to be, with the action of being. Through ecstasy man takes up his
existence. Ecstasy is then found to be the very event of existence. But then existence is
"contemporaneous" with the world and with light. In starting with position, we question
whether ecstasy is in fact the original mode of existence, whether the relationship
currently called a relationship between the ego and being is a movement toward an
outside, whether the ex is the principle root of the verb to exist.

49
ld. We were
concerned with determining the meaning of a much more general fact, that of the very
apparition of an existent, a substantive in the heart of this impersonal existence, which,
strictly speaking, we cannot give a name to, for it is a pure verb. A verb is not simply a

name for an action like a noun is a name for a thing. The function of a verb does not
consist in naming, but in producing language, that is, in bringing forth the seeds of poetry
which overwhelm "existents" in their position and their very positivity

Hypostasis, the apparition of a substantive,
is not only the apparition of a new grammatical category; it signifies the suspension of
the anonymous there is, the apparition of a private domain, of a noun. On the ground of
the there is a being arises. The ontological significance of an entity in the general
economy of Being, which Heidegger simply posits alongside of Being by a distinction,
will thus be deduced. By hypostasis anonymous being loses its there is character. An
entity — that which is — is a subject of the verb to be, and thus exercises a mastery over
the fatality of Being, which has become its attribute. Someone exists who assumes Being,
which henceforth is his being

Consciousness, position, the present, the "I," are not initially — although they are finally
— existents. They are events by which the unnameable verb to be turns into substantives.
They are hypostasis.

50
. In the hypostasis of an instant — in which a
subject's mastery, power, or virility are manifested as being in a world, in which intention
is the forgetting of oneself in light and a desire for things, in the abnegation of charity and
sacrifice — we can discern the return of the there is. 

to be absolutely master of being, 

This impossibility for the ego to not be a
self constitutes the underlying tragic element in the ego, the fact that it is riveted to its
own being

51
n. Its negativity is the simple "less" of need,
and not the very movement unto alterity. Eros, when separated from the Platonic
interpretation which completely fails to recognize the role of the feminine, can be the
theme of a philosophy which, detached from the solitude of light, and consequently from
phenomenology properly speaking, will concern us elsewhere

locke, kant accidents

In the flow of consciousness which constitutes our life in the world the ego maintains
itself as something identical across the changing multiplicity of becoming. Whatever be
the traces which life imprints upon us by modifying our habits and our character in
constantly changing all the contents that form our being something invariable remains.
The "I" remains there to tie the multicolored threads of our existence to one another.

"I" would be an indestructible point, from which acts and thought emanate, without
affecting it by their variations and their multiplicity. But can the multiplicity of accidents
not fail to affect the identity of the substance? The relationship of the substance with the
accidents are them-f selves so many modifications of that substance, such that the idea of
substance is going to enter in an infinite regression. It is there that the concept of
knowing makes it possible to maintain the identity of substance under the variation of
accidents


verbal and nominal to be and to have 
But the idealist interpretation of the identity of the “I” makes use of the logical idea of
identity, detached from the ontological event of the identification of an existent. For
identity is something that belongs not to the verb to be, but to that which is, to a noun
which has detached itself from the anonymous rustling of the there is. Identification is in
fact the very positing of an entity in the heart of the anonymous and all-invading being.
One can then not define a subject by identity, since identity covers over the event of the
identification of the subject

gy. Being me involves a bond' with
oneself, an impossibility of undoing oneself. To be sure, a subject creates a distance from
itself, but this stepping back is not a liberation.

53
t It comes in
the very scintillation of subjectivity which pulls back from its engagement without
undoing it. And this is the concept of freedom, which is only a thought: a recourse to
sleep, to unconsciousness, and not an escape, the illusory divorce of the ego from its self
which will end in a resumption of existence in common.

54
What is irreparable in the instant of hope is that that instant is a
present The future can bring consolation or compensation to a subject who suffers in the
present, but the very suffering of the present remains like a cry whose echo will resound
forever in the eternity of spaces. 

. Everything caught up in the ego, all its anxieties for itself, the
whole masquerade where its face never succeeds in stripping itself of its masks, lose their
importance

55
r condemned to itself, is transported "elsewhere" by the movement of the caress,
and is freed from the vice-grip of "oneself," finds "fresh air," a dimension and a future. Or rather,
it announces more than a simple future, a future where the present will have the benefit of a
recall. This effect of compassion, which we in fact all know, is usually posited as an initial datum
of psychology, and other things are then explained from it But in fact it is infinitely mysterious.


esurrection of the
"I." We believe that the "I" does not enter identical and unforgiven — a mere, avatar —
into the following instant, where it would undergo new experience whose newness will
not free it from its bond with itself — but that its death in the empty interval will have
been the condition for a new birth

Time is not a succession of instants filing
by before an I, but the response to the hope for the present


we posit the "I" as the very ferment of time in the present, the
dynamism of time. 

 The dynamism of the "I" resides in the very presence of the
present, in the exigency which this presence implies. This exigency does not concern
perseverance in being, nor, properly speaking, the impossible destruction of this presence,
but the unraveling of the knot which is tied in it, the definitive, which its evanescence
does not undo. It is an exigency for a recommencement of being, and a hope in each
recommencement of its non-definitiveness. The "I" is not a being that, as a residue of a
past instant, attempts a new instant It is this exigency for the non-definitive. The
"personality" of a being is its very need for time as for a miraculous fecundity in the
instant itself, by

56
The dialectic of time is the very
dialectic of the relationship with the other, that is, a dialogue which in turn has to be
studied in terms other than those of the dialectic of the solitary subject The dialectic of
the social relationship will furnish us with a set of concepts of a new kind. And the
nothingness necessary to time, which the subject cannot produce, comes from the social
relationship

57
f bringing out the specific terms with which
dialogue has to be conceived

, something more than the sum of individuals, in the Durkheim's sense, higher
than the individual

stirner
One thinks that my relationship with the other tends to identify me with him by
immersing me in a collective representation, a common ideal or a common action. It is
the collectivity which says "we" that feels the other to be alongside of oneself, and not
facing one. And a collectivity is necessarily set up around a third term which serves as
intermediary, which supplies what is common in the communion. Heidegger's
Miteinandersein also remains a collectivity of the with, and it is around truth that its
authentic form is found. It is a collectivity formed around something common. And like
in all philosophies of communion, in Heidegger sociality is completely found in the
solitary subject. The analysis of Dasein, in its authentic form, is carried out in terms of
solitude.

disruption of simple negativity 58
. He is what I am not: he
is the weak one whereas I am the strong one; he is the poor one, "the widow and the
orphan." There is no greater hypocrisy that that which invented well tempered charity. Or
else the other is the stranger, the enemy and the powerful one. What is essential is that he
has these qualities by virtue of his very alterity. Intersubjective space is initially
asymmetrical. The exteriority of the other is not simply an effect of space, which keeps
separate what conceptually is identical, nor is there some difference in the concepts
which would manifest itself through spatial exteriority. It is precisely inasmuch as it is
irreducible to these two notions of exteriority that social exteriority is an original form of
exteriority and takes us beyond the categories of unity and multiplicity which are valid
for things, that is, are valid in the world of an isolated subject, a solitary mind.
Intersubjectivity is not simply the application of the category of multiplicity to the
domain of the mind. It

. For the
intermediary of a father is required in order that we enter into fraternity, and in order that
I be myself the poor one, the weak and pitiful. And in order to postulate a father, who is
not simply a cause or a genus, the heterogeneity of the I and the other is required. This
heterogeneity and this relationship between genders, on the basis of which society and
time are to be understood, brings us to the material to which another work will be
devoted. To the cosmos, the world of Plato, is opposed the world of the spirit, where the
implications of eros are not reducible to the logic of genera, where the I is substituted for
the same and the Other [autrui] for the other. The peculiar form of the contraries and
contradictions of eros has escaped Heidegger, who in his lectures tends to present the
difference between the sexes as a specification of a genus. It is in eros that transcendence
can be conceived as something radical, which brings to the ego caught up in being,
ineluctably returning to itself, something else than this return, can free it of its shadow. To
simply say that the ego leaves itself is a contradiction, since, in quitting itself the ego
carries itself along — if it does not sink into the impersonal. Asymmetrical
intersubjectivity is the locus of transcendence in which the subject,


the concrete present, pregnant with all its past, already leaps
toward the future; it is before and after itself

59

The present instant constitutes a subject which is posited both as the master of time and
as involved in time. The present is the beginning of a being. The expressions which
constantly recurred in this exposition, such as "the fact of ...," "the event of ...," "the
effecting of ...," aim to convey this transmutation of a verb into a substantive, and to
express beings at the instant of their hypostasis, in which while still in movement they are
already substances. Such expressions are consonant with a general method of dealing
with states as events. The true substantiality of a subject consists in its substantivity: in
the fact that there is not only, anonymously, being in general, but there are beings capable
of bearing names. An instant breaks the anonymity of being in general. It is the event in
which, in the play of being which is enacted without players, there arise players in
existence, existents having being as an attribute — an exceptional attribute, to be sure,
but an attribute. In other words, the present is the very fact that there is an existent. The
present introduces into existence the preeminence, the mastery and the very virility of the
substantive. They are not what is suggested by the notion of freedom. Whatever be the
obstacles existence presents to an existent and however powerless it may be, an existent
is master of its existence, as a subject is master of its attribute. In an instant an existent
dominates existence.

60
 It makes it possible to account for both the substantiality and the spirituality of a
subject. In position, in the relationship which it effects with a place, in the here, we will
find the event by which existence in general, anonymous and inexorable, opens to leave
room for a private domain, an inwardness, the unconscious, sleep and oblivion, which
consciousness, always wakefulness, recall and reflection, is back to back with. The event
of an instant, substantivity, involves the possibility of existing at the threshold of a door
behind which one can retire, and which modern thought has caught sight of behind
consciousness. C

It is a scintillating light, whose very flash consists in
extinguishing itself, a light which at the same time is and is not.

 ecstacy. 
 The question "what is it to exist?" t
 an inside and an outside. Inscription in being is not an inscription in the
world. T