ify its position on th
teaching which casts a spell over youth and which, overstepping the bounds of
sibility, is already in vogue. For once, Fame has picked one who deserves it and, f
matter, one who is still

contradictory -- in vogue.  as a popular erson

m. The problem of correspondence between thing and thought presupposes a
free activity of thought and its isolation in relation to the object. I

. Its true source is thus the concept of "subject" as
elaborated by modem philosophy. The cogito presided over the subject's birth. Th

SUBJECT AND SUBSTANCE IN OUT
The concept of the subject, understood as a substance having a specific position in
the entire domain of being, presents us with difficulties of two kinds. First, how do we
understand this leave-taking from the self which the thinking substance brings about and
which displays an entirely original aspect? Indeed, we could say that thought, in reaching
out toward objects, does not actually take leave of itself

alism. Henceforth, the thinking substance will not have to reunite
with extended substance; it will recover that extended substance within itself. The subject
itself will constitute its own o

But thinking substance characterized as a "subject having to transcend itself' entails
a second antinomy still more profound, which is found to be at the very heart of id

What is more, once we admit that the subject is temporal-that it subsists as an eternally
present substratum, that it unfolds in time in a chain of causes and effects---can that subject
be called a substance and can it have being except in a purely nominal sen

FACTICITY 
is the expression of the fact of being [fait d'etre] or, rather, it is that fact of being itself.

f the essence of being [etre] in the sense of a that-which-is [objet etant].
Ontology is opposed to that-which-is in the very sense of the fact that it is and in its specific
mode of being.

; rather, the difference between subject and thing concerns the
existence, the very manner of being-there [etre-la]-if we can still even speak of existence
here

o why the ontological determination of the subject (if such a
thing is possible) must seek a temporal sense in the transcendence of the subject in relation
to itself

TRANSLATION IS A BARBARISM 
 Obliged to resort to barbarisms, we translate by 
 the word "temporalize" the German
expression sich zeitigen. Like its German equivalent, it serves to highlight better the specific sense
of time, which is not a "something" that exists or unfolds, but which is the very "effectuating" of
existence.


 In a way, it is
the history of the soul which transforms the soul into a subjectivity capable of griefs and
errors. S

which modem philosophy has raised, namely, the
unreality and the specificity of the subject/object relation. The chains of those imprisoned
in the cave determine, certainly, the structure of human existence, but this structure is
affirmed as coexisting purely and simply with the faculty of vision which man possesses
essentially as an attribut


most
or it possesses it already [se

9. [Trans. note] We translate throughout Heidegger's distinction between das Sein and das
Seiende, which Levinas translates as 1l'etre and 1'6tant respectively, as being and be-ing, in contrast
to other translations which often render Sein as Being and Seiende as being. There is no felicitous
way of distinguishing in English between the infinitive used as a verbal noun and the present
participle used substantively as there is in both German and French.

And it is because man understands being that he is led into the
heart of ontological inquiry. It is the study of man which is going to reveal to us the horizon
within which the problem of being arises, for it is here that the understanding of being
comes about.

izes man is not simply an act, essential for all
consciousness, which one could isolate within the movement of time in order to apprehend
in that movement the being at w

 But we should not prejudge, trivializing the understanding of being right from the
start, by seeing in it an act of the temporal flow. The concept of the temporal flow,
borrowed moreover from the vulgar notion of time, must not be accepted unc

sence of this be-ing. But to be precise-and
this point is fundamental to Heideggerian philosophy-man's essence is simultaneously
his existence. That which man is is at the very same time his way ofbeing, his way of being-
there [etre-la], his way of self-"temporalizi

 And it is because man's
essence consists in existence that Heidegger designates man by the term Dasein (being
right-there) [l'etre ici-bas], and not by the term Daseiendes (a be-ing right-there) [l'etant
ici-bas].

imagine consciousness as something that
first is and that then transcends itself, but that consciousness transcends itself throughout
its existence. If 


transcendence an event of existence

parody of heidegger is 
self parody too

trabslation of h into french0

e? This notion of the world-the condition of every
particular objec


spatiality
ne the notion of space 

zueg world exists through dead labor of men

 These are, in the very broad
sense of the term, tools [ustensiles] (Zeuge). Let us first ask what the mode of being of such
tools is. To this ontological question we must reply that the being of the tool is not identical

Handling
dged version.
17. We have taken this term in its etymological sense to translate the word Zu-hand-enheit
[readiness-to-hand].
etymology

What is handlable then refers back to materials. We thus discover
Nature, forests, waters, metals, mountains, winds, etc. But Nature discovered in such a
way is entirely relative to handling: these are the "raw materials" [matierespremieres].
We do not have a forest but wood, waters are hydroelectric power, the mountain is a
quarry, wind is wind in the sail. Finally the function is not only in view of something, but
also for someone. P

dynamic possibility
ssibility-not possibility in the logical


. These possibilities are not
imposed on his existence from without, like accidents. B

RIVITED
fective disposition shows us the fact that Dasein is riveted to
its possibilities, that its "right-there" is imposed upon it. In existing, Dasein is alwa


the abandonment to imposed possibili-
ties, gives to human existence a character of fact in the most specific and most dramatic
sense of the term, in relation to which the empirical "facts" of science are only derivative;

FACTICITY
ctivity" [effectivited] (Faktizitaiit). And the understanding an

s of effectivity" [Hermeneutique de
l'effectivite] (Hermeneutik der Faktizitiit) [see Becker 425].

be detached from time, for, by virtue of the inner possibility of existence,
this exit is a mode of time. The progress toward the eternal, which Western consciousness
believes to have accomplished with the supertemporal point of view of the sciences, is not
a victory achieved by spirit over concrete and temporal existence, but a moment of the
very drama of this existence. This leap toward the eternal does not transcend this drama
that it may give a new birth to persons; it does not transfigure the eternal by an act of grace
come from beyond. 

sts above all in getting one's bearings again [remonter la pente]

s, Heidegger conceives of the history of philosophy as a destruction
[destruction], namely, essentially as an attempt to get back one's bearings after the fall.

way that "color" or "length" translate the quiddity of a material object. For the peculiarity
of Dasein-and we have already drawn attention to this many times-consists in existing


levinas is a translator of heidegger.  a substitituion,  of his words. metaphor, carrying words over from language to language

being and mecoming meaning of existence of duration 

b4ing theown right there

negation
25. The nothingness to which traditionalphilosophy from Parmenides to Bergson tried in vain
to gain access, supposing it to be of a theoretical nature--as theoretical negation of being--is
essentially accessible to anguish. Theoretical negation is a modality of it. See Was ist Metaphysik?

own right-there,

But that is not to relapse into empiricism. For what characterizes empiricism is the
strangeness of the empirical object in relation to the spirit that grasps it. Hence, the
incomprehension of the empirical fact. 

We do not stand before the
fact--we are this fact. In

this effectivity. The empiricists, whilst beginning from real
men, did nothing else. The sense of the individuality of the person had to escape them, for
the very level in which this individuality is could not appear to them, in view of the
intellectualism of their attitude, which consists in objectifying [se trouver devant] the fact

t. But in the fact of man, Heidegger was seeking not the "foreign" [l'dtranger],
not the object that reveals the introspection of psychologists, but effective existence
understanding itself throughout its effectivit


// expressions
. We will deduce from it finally the
phenomenon of theoretical knowledge. We will find time at the heart of everything.
Already the fact that the structures studied are modes of existing and not "quiddities"
allows us to guess their kinship with time which is not a be-ing but being. And already
expressions such as "always already," "in front of," and "next to"-all charged with the
tragic sense which is that of solicitude-allow us to discern in them the ontological root
of that which one calls in everyday life, which is plunged into a trivialized and inoffensive
time, the past, the future, and the presen

expressions ontological root

Rooting through Routing through his work of levinas 
