ROLLAND
 It should consist of reading in an early text the inscrip-
tion of a future writing-if only obliquely [en creux]-of a
book "to come,"

its status as a "youthful work." 

stages of a "path of think-

nd direction to that "escape" whose account as-
serted, at that time, only its pure demand. 

to direct us straightaway to-
ward the philosophical problem posed by the pages it attempts
to introduce. T

of seeking to situate in this study the significa-
tion of the word being [etre];

 in the later works. In a second moment, it is up to us to elucidate the demand for "escape" that arises from this way of understanding the verb to be, a

 the metaphor borrowed from Pushkin will be in play throughout this introduction. L

, that this rather obscure metaphor of escape or evasion, which itself never gets raised to the level of an operative concept, and which, precisely, is here defined neither in its exact meaning (w

will not find adequate philosophical expression until the counter-concept of "otherwise than being" is forged

us to multiply the references to Levinas's later work, to show
how he was able later on to take up, develop, modify, or simply
abandon certain of the analyses and intuitions here

 what the debt to Heidegger is. 8

Levinas's 1932 study, "the search for meaning, ontology, is phi-
losophy itself." 9 A

Heidegger that philosophy defines itself by being affixed to [ar-
rimage] the question of being is at the same time to think be-
ing with him in the dimension of the ontological difference.

 ''And, thanks to Heidegger, our ears have been educated
to hear being in its verbal resonance, an unusual and unforget-
table sonority." 1

 firmly established in the fait accompli of being and in-
capable of getting out of it? And, in these conditions, is excendence
[rising out of] possible, and how would it be accomplished? What
is the ideal of happiness and human dignity that it promises? (56) 14

Levinas's med-
itation will align itself, in effect, with pure existence, with exis-
tentia or quoddity, distinct from essentia or quiddity. 

The "perfection" of being is "the elementary truth that there is
being' when this truth "is revealed at a depth that measures its
brutality and its seriousness" (5

The "perfection" ofbeing is its brutality, the brutality of its there is [il ya] . 17 This perfection is, in effect, that of a verb, of
being's pure verbality, that is, again, its pure affirmation

 there is [il ya], on the in-side or withdrawn from all that which is, the fact by which there is all that there is. B

The affective
disposition shows us the fact that Dasein is riveted to its possibili-
ties, that its "there" [ici-bas] is imposed on it. In existing, Dasein is
always already thrown into the midst of its possibilities and not
placed before them.

 term "dereliction" [dereliction]. Dereliction is the
source and necessary foundation of affectivity. 

 Having been thrown into the world, aban-
doned and delivered over to oneself-such is the ontological de-
scription of a fact. H

 Geworfanheit, which translates the fact, for
Dasein, of being riveted to its possibilities, more readily than it
does a dereliction with overly existentialist overtones.

 Heidegger's seminar "What Is Metaphysics?" 

 "manifests the being in its totality'' (

The fundamental disposition mani-
festing being qua being, which is announced in the feeling of
being riveted or held fast is nausea.

 basis of what nausea
would become in Sartre's prose that it should here be under-
stood. 24



 form that assembled their
"qualities" and presented them in a face (Eifo;). In brief, it is
in its ontological significance, or as a Stimmung in Heidegger's
sense, that nausea must be understood.

In that instant without a future
"that precedes vomiting, and from which vomiting will deliver
us" (66), and without nausea itself having any awareness of this
promise, we are sick at heart in such a way that it is the heart, or
the depths of ourselves, that is touched, but in this way, too, our
whole being is affected in its manner of existing or relating to its
own existence.

 In nausea-which amounts to an impossibility of
being what one is-we are at the same time riveted to ourselves,
enclosed in a tight circle that smothers.

 nausea manifests the nothing as be-
ing itself and manifests being as the very act of positing itself, a

What nausea manifests, ultimately, is being as the
there is [ii ya} of the there is being [ii ya de ntre], when there is
nothing yet [quand ii n'y a pas encore]

Some-
thing that is neither a subject, nor a substantive. T

e thought as the there is. the
return of nothing into an unalterably binding presence. W

, understood in the neuter or as the there is,
breaks through in a startling way, as does all the passivity of the
being-there o

. Yet nothing would be more false than to suppose
that this notion itself is forgotten or relegated to the back-
ground. 

the there is-, but it is
above all the description of this there is itself, and the insistence
on its inhuman neutrality." 44

 "We have not dared to write es-
sance as the history of language would require, in which the
suffix -ance, deriving from -antia or -entia, gave birth to ab-
stract nouns of action." 4

, the very esse of
this essance leads back to the there is or to the absorption in this
pure fact of being that On Escape proposed

All this meditation on being riveted and on
the escape whose need it elicits is also a meditation on the body,

Now, this essay, in many respects foreshadowing "On Es-
cape," thematized the body explicitly as the site of a sui generis
bind. 

 We must surpass the classical
conception of the body and on the basis, for example, of the
phenomenon of pain ("called, lightly, physical"), 5

 It must give way to
the idea of expansion, f


faire effort of producing is dead labor
 Let us turn then to this notion of "escape," which up
to now our analysis has avoided addressing-just as it avoided
the relevant passages from Levinas's text-since this notion
gave the essay its title and constitutes its "inimitable theme"
(54). It i

The very fact of existing refers only to itself [a soi]. 

the fact of self-positing [se poser] is laid bare, 

ENDED WITH ROLLAND  LOOK BACK


Levinas

 discord between human freedom and the
brutal fact of being that assaults this freedom. The conflict
from which the revolt arises opposes man to the world, not
man to himself. The simplicity of the subject lies beyond the
struggles that tear it apart and that, within man, set the "I"
[mot] against the "non-I" [non-mot].

49-50
 The individual is called upon to loosen the grasp of the foreign reality [realite etrangere] that chokes it, but this is in order to assure the full flowering of its own reality. Only the struggle with the obstacle is open to the heroism of the individual; this struggle is turned toward the
stranger [letranger]. N

This conception of the "I" [moi] as self-sufficient is one of the essential marks of the bourgeois spirit and its philosophy. AF.
sufficiency for the petit bourgeois, this conception of the "I" nonetheless nourishes the audacious dreams of a restless and en-
terprising capitalism. This conception presides over capitalism's work ethic, its cult of initiative and discovery, which aims less
at reconciling man with himself than at securing for him the unknowns of time and things. 

defense against things and all that is unforeseeable in them. His instinct for possession is an instinct for integration, and his im-
perialism is a search for security. H

 Yet, prosaically materialistic [mediocre-
ment materialiste], he prefers the certainty of tomorrow to today's enjoyments.

Yet this category of sufficiency is conceived in the image of being such as things offer it to us. They are. Their essence and

Being is: there is nothing to add to this assertion as long as we envision in a
being only its existence. This reference to oneself is precisely what one states when one speaks of the identity of being.

of the fact of being,

The transcendence of these limits, communion with the infinite being, remained philosophy's sole
preoccupation 

 The escape, in regard to
which contemporary literature

world-weariness, the disorder of our time [ma! du siecle].

 the individual who does not yet belong to
himself, but an autonomous person who, on the solid terrain he has conquered, feels liable to be mobilized-in every sense
of the term. 2 P

 The elementary truth that there is bein~a
being that has value and weight-is revealed at a depth that measures its brutality and its seriousness. 

the ground of suffering consists of the impossibility of interrupting it, and of an acute feeling of being held fast [rive1. The
impossibility of getting out of the game and of giving back to
things their toy-like uselessness heralds the precise instant at
which infancy comes to an end, and defines the very notion of
seriousness.

. Escaping is the quest for the marvelous, which is liable to break up the somnolence of our bourgeois existence. H

53-4
 in no way fixes its ends in ad-
vance but creates them instead. Does the created being not be
come a burden, qua event inscribed in a destiny, for its creator?
It is precisely from all that is weighty in being that escaping sets
forth. 


For fundamentally, becoming is not the opposite of being.
The propensity toward the future and the "out-ahead-of-one-
self" contained in the vital urge mark a being destined for a
race-course [voue a une course]

With the vital urge
we are going toward the unknown, but we are going some-
where, whereas with escape we aspire only to get out [sortir]. 

The ground of this
theme is constituted-if one will pardon the neologism-by
the need for excendence. 4 Thus, to the need for escape, being
appears not only as an obstacle that free thought would have to
On Escape
 55
surmount, nor even as the rigidity that, by inviting us to rou-
tine, demands an effort toward originality; rather it appears as
an imprisonment from which one must get out.

 the identity of being reveals its nature as en-
chainment, for it appears in the form of suffering and invites us
to escape. Thus, escape is the need to get out of oneself, that is,
to break that most radical and unalterably binding of chains, the
fact that the I [moil is oneself[soi-meme}.

 the sacrifice of numerous possibilities that will never be realized that incites us to escape. 

 the chains of the I to the self [du moi a soi]. It is being it- self or the "one-self" from which escape flees, and in no wise
being's limitation. In escape the I flees itself, not in opposition
to the infinity of what it is not or of what it will not become,
but rather due to the very fact that it is or that it becomes. Its

? On the contrary, is it nothing else than the
mark of a certain civilization, firmly established in the fait accompli of being and incapable of getting out of it? A

 The escape we envisage should look
to us like the inner structure of this fact of self-positing [le fait
de se poser]. W

This is why we believe that
the problem of the origin and death could not be judiciously
posed until the analysis of escape was completed

 then this lack could not affect the "existence of the existent," to which one can neither add nor remove anything. In reality, need is intimately tied to being, but not in the qual-
ity of privation. On the contrary, need will allow us to discover,
not a limitation of that being that desires to surpass its limits in
order to enrich and fulfill itself, but rather the purity of the fact
of being, which already looks like an escape.

We note in the phenomenon of malaise a different
and perhaps superior demand: a kind of dead weight in the
depths of our being, whose satisfaction does not manage to rid
us of it.

pleasure.

Pleasure appears as it develops. It is neither there as a
whole, nor does it happen all at once

 This is a movement that does not tend toward a goal,
for it has no end.

There is something dizzy-
ing to pleasure's unfolding [devenir]. There is ease or cowardice.
The [human] being feels its substance somehow draining from
it; it grows lighter, as if drunk, and disperses.

ashamed to find himself again existing.

 It is nev-
ertheless fair to say that pleasure is not the goal of need, for
pleasure is not an end [terme]. Pleasure is a process; it is the
process of departing from being [processus de sortie de letre]. 

62
surpass  superlative relationship to oneself
 If, like a process that is far
from closing up on itself, pleasure appears in a constant sur-
passing of oneself, it breaks just at the moment where it seems
to get out absolutely. It 


64
nakedness of person
function of mask
identity as 

unalterable presence to self

Shame arises each time we are unable to make others for-
get [faire oublier] our basic nudity. It is related to everything we
would like to hide and that we cannot bury or cover up. The
timid man who is all arms and legs is ultimately incapable of
covering the nakedness of his physical presence with his moral
person. Poverty is not a vice, but it is shameful because, like the
beggar's rags, it shows up the nakedness of an existence inca-
pable of hiding itself. 

 For what is the meaning of shameful
nakedness?

The ne-
cessity of fleeing, in order to hide oneself, is put in check by the
impossibility of fleeing oneself. 

 Nakedness is shameful when it is the
sheer visibility [patence] of our being, of its ultimate intimacy.
And the nakedness of our body is not that of a material thing, antithesis of spirit, but the nakedness of our total being in all
its fullness and solidity, of its most brutal expression of which
we could not fail to take note

 for her
body appears to her with that exteriority to self that serves as a
form of cover. Being naked is not a question of wearing clothes

 What shame discovers [decouvre] is the be-
ing who uncovers himself [se decouvre].

8 The state of nausea that precedes vomiting,
and from which vomiting will deliver us, encloses us on all
sides. Yet it does not come from outside to confine us

self-vomiting

There is in nausea a refusal to remain there, an effort to get
out. Yet this effort is always already characterized as desperate:
in any case, it is so for any attempt to act or to think. And this
despair, this fact of being riveted, constitutes all the anxiety of nausea. In nausea-which amounts to an impossibility of be-
ing what one is-we are at the same time riveted to ourselves,
enclosed in a tight circle that smothers. We 

As such, nausea discovers only the nakedness of being in
its plenitude and in its utterly binding presence.

The fault consists not in the lack of pro-
priety but almost in the very fact of having a body, of being
there [s

o has no choice but to vomit, is still "scandalized" by him-
self The presence of another is even desired, to a certain de-
gree, for it allows the scandal of nausea to be brought down to
the level of an "illness," 

But is nausea not a fact of consciousness, which the I
knows as one of its states? Is this existence itself, or only an exis-
tent? In 

 Thereby, nausea posits itself not only as some-
thing absolute, but as the very act of self-positing: it is the af-
firmation itself of being. It refers only to itself, is closed to all
the rest, without windows onto other things. N

. Therefore, one might say,
nausea reveals to us the presence of being in all its impotence,
which constitutes this presence as such. It is the impotence of
pure being, in all its nakedness. Therefore, ultimately, nausea
also appears as a fact of consciousness that is "exceptional." I

, but toward release and escape


The banal observation that man is by birth engaged in an
existence he neither willed nor chose must not be limited to the
case of man as a finite being.

, in other words, the
impossibility of distinguishing, in this being, what takes on the
weight [ of being] from that weight itself. 

71
eternity is the intensificatoin of the being riveted to itself 
t it is not in view of eternity that escape is made. Eternity is
just the intensification, or radicalization, of the fatality of that
being, which is riveted to itself [lui-meme]. And there is a deep
truth in the myth that says that eternity weighs heavily upon
the immortal gods [see Rolland's Annotation 9

9. ,This reticence in regard to the idea of eternity, like the
will underlying it to think time at once against Plato and
against Heidegger, has been expressed in the very interesting re-
view, published in Recherches philosophiques in 1934-1935, on a
work today forgotten: Total Presence by Louis Lavelle. 21 What
interested Levinas in this work was the rehabilitation of the pre-
sent, as performed by Lavelle against the "German philoso-
/phers" for whom "the flow of time laid out, in some sense, the
opaque density of being: in the wake of a persistent, unelim-
inable past and before a future that is unknown but threaten-
ing, there was nothing but a fleeting present where nothing al-
lowed us to catch our breath, or assert ourselves as our own
masters." Yet the review ended nevertheless with an extremely
interesting reticence, of which we cite the essentials:
The great merit of Mr. Lavelle consists in making us aware of this
truth that the rehabilitation of the present is the sole means by
which to break the tragic play of time. Yet for Mr. Lavelle, the vic-
tory over time is a stepping outside of time [sortie en dehors du
temps]. Although the being that supports the subject might be
pure act and in no way a substance, Mr. Lavelle's present is intem-
poral. It is the crossroads of time and eternity, but the promise of
happiness is an arrow, sent off toward eternity. ... Must the reha-
bilitation of the present-as apogee of time and a condition of
freedom-lead us fatally to the encounter with that eternity so
hard to separate from the impersonal coldness of a mathematical
truth? Is Mr. Lavelle's present not a present eternity, stripped of the
living wealth of the concrete present, rather than an eternal pre-
sent wherein time itself furnishes the means to break the chains of
the past? In other words, is there not in time itself a perfection other
than the privilege of being a moving imitation of immobile eter-
nity? [Rolland's emphasis]
A perfection of time outside any relation to the eternity
whose "ontologistic character" On Escape had underscored (76);
a perfection of time in itself against the essential "imperfection"
of being. How could this not evoke for us, again, the late texts
in which time finds that perfection of the otherwise than being,
to be expressed as the beating of the Other in the Same and as
a-Dieu [to-God]. 22
88
 Annotations
If nothing of this is effectively expressed in the 1935 essay,
the preeminence [precellence] accorded to time over eternity
nevertheless allows another trait of Levinas's thought to come
through; it concretizes his effort to break with models of satis-
faction, and was described recently as follows:
According to the models of satisfaction, the desire to possess com-
mands the search, enjoyment is worth more than need, triumph is
truer than failure, certitude is more perfect than doubt, and the
answer goes farther than the question. Seeking, suffering, ques-
tioning would be simple diminutions of the happy find, of enjoy-
ment, happiness, and the answer; insufficient thoughts of the
identical and the present, indigent cognitions or cognition in the
state of indigence. Once again this is good sense. This is also com-
mon sense. 23
Here is an effort to break with the models of satisfaction
that, inversely, signify that questioning, disquiet, desire, and
time are better and signify more than answers, rest, satisfaction,
or eternity. This is what another text, contemporary with the
one just cited, states in a positive sense this time.
In the question-as in searching beyond the given-the Other
disturbs the same an-archically, without being given as a presence
(because, without giving itself [sans se donner]), without the ab-
solute priority that would be a beginning and in which the Other
would go back to a seeing that could only see in this Other an-
other Same asserting itself in the eternity of being. The an-archy
of the question and its rationality do not belong to the intrigue of
knowledge and being, even though, in philosophy, this intrigue
may be stated only in terms of knowledge and, thus stated, only to
be contradicted. The question and its rationality do not belong to
knowledge and being. This is so, even though Western philosophy
represents an effort toward pacifying the question by the response,
that is, an effort toward hearing the questioning as always bearing
Annotations
 89
on the given. Even though Western philosophy is an effort in view
of bringing to rest the dis-quiet always judged to be bad-even
when one calls it romantic-and in view of basing the given on a
foundation, which, moreover, amounts to conferring on it the es-
sance of being. 24


. Ontologism in its broadest meaning
remained the fundamental dogma of all thought. Despite all its
subtlety, it remained prisoner of an elementary and simple
principle, according to which one could think and feel only
that which exists or is supposed to exist. A principle more im-
perious than that of non-contradiction, since here nothingness
itself-to the degree that thinking encounters it-gets clothed
with existence, and so we must without restriction state, against
Parmenides, that non-being is.


The romanticism of creative activity is ani-
mated by the profound need to get out of being, yet all the same
it shows an attachment to its created essence and its eyes are
fixed on being. For this romanticism, the problem of God has
remained that of his existence [see Rolland's Annotation rn].

 Every civi-
lization that accepts being-with the tragic despair it contains
and the crimes it justifies-merits the name "barbarian" [see
Rolland's Annotation n].

11. The value of European civilization is due not merely to
its Greek origin-or to its being rooted in Greek ground, in
which philosophy was born in dethroning "opinion, in which
all tyrannies threaten and lay in wait" 25-but also (above all?)
to its Hebraic origin. This is indicated in other terms by "The
Living Relevance of MaYmonides" [L'actualite de Mai"monide], a
text contemporary with On Escape, published in 1935 in Paix et
Droit. 26 We reproduce here its final sentences:
Paganism is not the negation of the spirit, nor the ignorance of a
unique God. The mission of Judaism would be quite trivial if it
Annotations
 91
limited itself to teaching monotheism to the earth's peoples. This
would be to instruct those who already know. Paganism is a radical
powerlessness to get out ofthe world. It consists not in denying spir-
its and gods but in situating chem in the world. The Prime Mover,
which Aristotle nevertheless isolated from the universe, was able to
carry to the heights only the poor perfection of created things. Pa-
gan morality is only the consequence of this basic incapacity to
transgress the limits of the world. The pagan is shut up in chis
world, sufficient unto himself and closed upon himself. He finds it
solid and firmly established. He finds it eternal. He orders his ac-
tions and his destiny according to the world. Israel's sentiment in
regard to the world is entirely different. It is stamped by suspicion.
The Jew does not have, in the world, the definitive foundations of
the pagan. In the midst of the most complete confidence accorded
to things, the Jew is tormented by a silent worry. As unshakable as
the world might appear to chose one calls healthy minds, it con-
tains for the Jew the trace of the provisional and the created. This
is the madness or the faith of Israel. Maimonides gave it a philo-
sophical expression; he specified its true sense and its originality.
The value of Western civilization would thus be tied to its
double origin, and principally to the call it receives from its
Hebraic and biblical origin (whatever the permutations this call
might have undergone in Christianity and its various forms, to
the call to pass through the world rather than settling in it-in
which we can hear: to go "beyond being." "For the little hu-
manity that adorns the earth," according to the expression of
the last page of Otherwise than Being, that page of breathless or
panting beauty, for the little fraternity establishing humanity
otherwise than as a pack of wolves-it will be necessary that
the echo at least of this call still resound. This was an echo
heard not by Odysseus but by Abraham, of the call of a Tran-
scendence that has inscribed its trace not in the pre-Socratic
fragments but in the rolls of the Torah.
92
 Annotations
Paganism, as the "acceptance of being" or as the "funda-
mental incapacity to transgress the limits of the world"-as the
forgetting not of being but of the otherwise than being, or as a
deafness to the call of a God "not contaminated by being"-
would merit the name "barbarian" by leaving the field open to
barbarism: in "accepting" being without justifying it. For its
part, this justification is inseparable from ethics. We are re-
minded of this by the tamarind that Abraham planted at Beer-
sheba (Genesis 21:32), which, according to the rabbinic inter-
pretation, was not only a tree but first an acronym: "The three
letters necessary to write its name in Hebrew are the initials of
Nourishment, Drink, and Lodging, three things necessary to
man, which man offers to man. The earth is for this. Man is its
master in order to serve men. "27




ROLLAND Annotations

 But the reflection on the body leads us
to wonder, nevertheless, whether it might not have yet another
origin: Jewishness-in the sense in which Nazi anti-Semitism
was able brutally to unveil, during these years, its precisely non-
remittable quality. We must return to this. We are thinking of
an article Levinas published in 1935, in issue number 8 of the
journal of the Alliance Israelite Universelle, Paix et Droit: "The
Religious Inspiration of the Alliance." 1 We might note the fol-
lowing few sentences: "Hitlerism is the greatest trial-an in-
comparable trial-through which Judaism has had to pass ....
The pathetic destiny of being Jewish becomes a fatality. One
can no longer flee it. The Jew is ineluctably riveted to his Ju-
daism" (p. 4). 
" (p. 4). A youth "definitively attached to the sufferings
Annotations
 75
and joys of the nations to which it belongs ... discovers in the
reality ofHitlerism all the gravity of being Jewish''; "In the bar-
barous and primitive symbol of race ... Hitler recalled that
one does not desert Judaism."

a "prephilosophical experi-
ence," fundamental at the least, of the trauma provoked by the
first manifestations of racial anti-Semitism

, in the fatality of
being-riveted to that which one cannot desert. Might one not
think, then, that it is the brutal revelation of being-Jewish, as
being-riveted-to-Judaism as to that which one cannot desert,

 being-riveted-to-being; for it is election in a
positive sense, that is, as service, but thereby already an ethical
deliverance relative to being understood as a "race course"
[course]. This was indicated already in a text just subsequent to
the period we are concerned with here, "The Spiritual Essence
of Anti-Semitism A

but rather the Good, that is, as the
later work will teach us, that which, beyond being, is better
than being.)

. He did not mean thereby what Nietzsche detested
in Flaubert, but rather the story of Jacob, who, unlike Esau,
"the man who knew hunting," became a "complete man" who
"lived in tents," w

What thus becomes altogether interesting is
the equivalence established through the sentence's phrasing, be-
tween being-out-ahead-of-oneself and being-devoted-to-a-race-
course.

"reduction of the human to the task of being." "The essance of
being or being-in-question is in question in the being-there as
having-to-be, which is the being of man. Man is: this is equiva-
lent to man has to be. The 'property' indicated in the having
[avoir] of the having-to-be [de l'avoir-a-etre] measures all that
which is irrecusable-irrecusable to the point of dying-in the
strict obligation to be, included in the to of the to be. "4

the race toward this self out-ahead
of oneself, the "epic of being"

-The idea of "ontological imperialism" as "the mark of a
certain civilization" will reappear toward the end of the essay
(98); it is at that point that we will speak of it.

the one hand, and
as tied, on the other, to "getting out," 

superlative more than the negation that interrupts systems

: "It is the superlative, more than the negation of
categories, that interrupts systems, as though the logical order
and the being it succeeds in espousing retained the superlative
which exceeds them: in subjectivity the superlative is the exor-
bitance of a null-site, in caresses and in sexuality there is the
'over-bid' of tangency-as though tangency admitted de-
grees-up to contact with the entrails, a skin going under an-
other skin." 

 Pleasure has
ultimately but one language; it is that of the "Mother": 

 The ecstasy [ volupte1 in which you are sinking is al-
ready so great that I can tell you: it will be followed by your un-
doing."12

Yet the failure inscribed in the very unfolding [le de-
venir meme] of pleasure again makes inevitable one of its es-
sential traits (massively present in Bataille moreover): repeti-
tion. W

Yet the failure inscribed in the very unfolding [le de-
venir meme] of pleasure again makes inevitable one of its es-
sential traits (massively present in Bataille moreover): repeti-
tion. Whence pleasure's affinity with desire, such as Hegel
describes it at the beginning of the chapter "The Actualization
of Self-Consciousness" in the Phenomenology of Spirit. 14 But
Annotations
 81
whence also its affinity with writing as repetitions, returns,
recommencements dulling the sharp edge of every beginning,
that is, such as Blanchot thinks it. We must break with all chat
in order to think about an escape that does not fail, as it
were-that is, with desire, such as it is in play in literature and
erotics. But this signifies arriving at what Totality and Infinity
designated as metaphysical desire. a desire without deception,
without the return to its point of departure, a desire not ha-
rassed by repetition-because it is a desire that is not oriented
toward satisfaction.

But this again means expressing it in this way, passing from an
"erotic stage" to an "ethical stage," which for Levinas, moreover,
contains the religious within itself, because the religious does not
signifj, outside ofethics.

religious erotic prophetic ethical

poetic playfulness of the prose 

poetic and ethical are the same in derash

Levinas evoked these verses of Pushkin during a conversation
about On Escape. It is appropriate to point out here, notwith-
standing, that this essay was written quite independently of M.
Levinas.
[These last verses, which serve as a denouement to this verse
novel, read:
Rushed by have many, many days
since young Tatiana, and with her
Onegin, in a blurry dream
appeared to me for the first time-
and the far stretch of a free novel
Notes to Pages 4-7 97
I through a magic crystal
still did not make out clearly.


A movement altogether characteristic ofLevinasian writing,
which will appear above all in his great works and, no doubt most
powerfully, in OB. This is a revolving movement that Silvano Pet-
rosino defines in the following way: "Levinas's text repeats itself,
but it is precisely in this repetition that it must be read. In this rep-
etition, the writing does not progress, it deepens." See Silvano Pet-
rosino and J. Rolland, La verite nomade (Paris: Editions la Decou-
verte, 1984).

This is how Levinas translates Heidegger's term Dasein, or be-
ing-there, in this study.
[Note, however, that Levinas's use of the term "ici-bas" (rather
than simply "ici" or "la") to translate the German da-, generally
rendered in English by "there," enriches this "there" in a useful
way. The French "ici-bas" literally means "here below" or "here on
earth," and so, obliquely, it refers both to the human world and to
what defines it as "here below," i.e., the sky or the heavens. Lev-
inas's intention is clearly to suggest by "ici-bas" the world in which
Dasein finds itself and for which it feels concern. -Trans.]

translated as "dereliction" or "desertion."

 Thus dawns the idea of an exist-
ing that occurs [se fait] without us, without a subject, of an
existing without an existent.


And they have an invisible hand that kills:
Upon return, their gaze filters this black venom
That fills the suffering eye of the beaten bitch,
And you sweat, caught in an atrocious funnel!

" I will use both "nothingness" and occasionally
"nothing" to maintain a contemporary tone in the translation, for
though "the nothing" is a somewhat better translation (since
"nothing-ness" intensifies the substantialization of "nothing,"
which is not useful), it has an anachronistic overtone. See Hei-
degger, Being and Time, ~ 58,

s. The second, and thinner, reason is due
to the rather astonishing fact that Blanchot used the term there is
in a short story that he wrote while Levinas was drafting "On Es-
cape" ("Le dernier mot" [The Last Word] in Blanchot, Le ressasse-
ment eternel [Paris: Minuit, 1951, 1983]). I

2. This text is now available from the publisher, Editions Ri-
vages (Paris, 1997). It is followed by an important essay by Miguel
Abensour, whose merit is to have laid out its philosophical range
and implications, situating it in relation to "On Escape."

 The French "du moi asoi-meme" reads literally, "of the me
to oneself." A few lines farther, Levinas adds, "It is therefore our in-
timacy, that is, our presence to ourselves [notre presence a nous-
memes]." In the first instance, it is not my presence to my-self [moi-
meme] that is in question, the soi- of soi-meme is not posited as our
identity or our ego or our moi. Our soi-meme is paradoxically mate-
rial-though not the way a thing or a body is material; it is mater-
ial in the way exposure and vulnerability is 'material,' i.e., open to
being touched or harmed, or ashamed. It is experienced through
sensation and affect (nausea and shame) rather than reflectively.
And in the moment of being experienced, it is not reflected in an
idealist sense as I-am-I. Yet soi-meme is also not an object. Hence
Levinas can mean the same thing when he writes "presence of the
ego to itself" and "our presence to ourselves." In the later work Oth-
erwise than Being or Beyond Essence, Levinas will write:
What we are here calling oneself [soi-meme], or the other in
the same, where inspiration arouses respiration, ... pre-
cedes this empirical order, which is part of being, of the uni-
verse, of the State.... Here we are trying to express the un-
conditionality of a subject, which does not have the status of
a principle .... The self is a sub-iectum; it is under the
weight of the universe .... To be in-oneself, backed up
against oneself ... is for the I to be in itself, lying in itself
beyond essence.

Adam thought of
hiding not his sex but rather his face

 inversion of the terms of the
ontological difference and, thereby, remained prisoner to that dif-
ference. He subseq

ence," trans. Jeffrey L. Kosky,
Graduate Faculty Philosophy journal 20, no. 2 and 21, no. r
(1998)]) and to show how Otherwise than Being, which The Idol
and Distance ignored confidently, no longer functioned according
to this logic of inversion and, to that degree, gave itself the where-
withal to "let significations from beyond the ontological differ-
ence signify." Also see remarks I made, with Silvano Petrosino, on
this question, but before Marion's reconsideration, in La verite
nomade, pp. roo-102.


The I [moi] is the very crisis of the being of beings within
the human sphere [de l'etre de l'etant dans l'humain]." "Ethique
comme philosophie premiere," Le Nouveau Commerce 84-85, p. 19.

82. OB, 209/r64 [translation modified for fluency with the
French]. One parallel with De !'evasion is seen immediately in the
hyphenation of "dis-heartening," or e-ca:urant, which means sick-
ening more readily than it means disheartening [compare the
French ma! au ca:ur for nausea, which Levinas and Rolland dis-
cuss. -Trans.].

 This expression is proposed in EE, preface to the second
edition. But the "spatial metaphor" is never simple in Levinas,
where it never goes without posing a question, as Derrida had
noted in 1968, in regard to height.

But what is the necessity of this
inscription of language in space at the very moment at
which it [the most-high] exceeds it [language]?

86. See, in regard to such language, the illuminating remark in
the final version ofLevinas's "Signature" [in Difficult Freedom: Es-
says on Judaism]: "It has been possible to present, since Totality
and Infinity, this relation with the Infinite as irreducible to 'thema-
tization.' ... The ontological language, which Totality and Infinity
still uses in order to exclude the purely psychological significance of
the proposed analyses, is henceforth avoided. And the analyses
themselves refer not to the experience in which a subject always
thematizes what he equals, but to the transcendence in which he
answers for that which his intentions have not encompassed" [p.
397/295; Rolland's emphasis except for the last sentence. -Trans.].
It seemed to us possible to affirm that it is thanks alone to the
abandonment of the ontological language that the analyses have
been able to pass from experience to transcendence. In this way,
the manner or turn of thinking that was invented in Otherwise
than Being is indissociable from the manner or turn of writing by
which it is expressed

BERGO
ellipses marking the breakages

1. Levinas ends the sentence with an ellipsis to indicate that the
ongoing concern of philosophy with transcendence will be inter-
rupted, here, historically and, as it were, syntactically. The begin-
ning of the following paragraph announces the interruption,
which is none other than the possible end of discourses on infinite
being, brought about by the "modern sensibility" in philosophy
and elsewhere. -Trans.
2. The substantive inamovibilite is one of several metaphors
used by Levinas that are borrowed from a juridical vocabulary. The
term refers precisely to the quality of certain magistrates and
judges, who can be neither displaced from, nor deprived of, their
functions without exceptional procedures. -Trans.
3. In the original text the verbs "fix" and "create" are in the
plural; t
4- The word is modeled upon "trans-scendence," adjoining
"ex-" or "out" to the Latin scandere, "to climb". -Trans.



. The soi-meme receives empha-
sis as vulnerability and suffering in OB. -

 The feminine pronoun "elle" appears to refer to the
n6
 Notes to Page 70
brutality of existence ("la brutalite de !'existence," both nouns be-
ing feminine). Ambiguity arises because in the previous sentence
"limitation" is also a feminine noun


ro. The French reads: "Placer derriere l'etre le createur, conr,:u
a son tour comme un etre, ce n'est pas non plus poser le com-
mencement de l'etre en dehors des conditions de l'etre deja consti-
tute." Levinas is enumerating two cases where the problem of ori-
gin is highlighted by the contradiction implicit in defining the
beginning of being-whether as event or as creation-as a func-
tion of a preexisting cause or of some being that preexists the emer-
gence of being itself He is looking, as he will say, for a paradox
rather than a contradiction. The paradox is illuminated by the phe-
nomenon of nausea, where being, which is always already weighty
or grave, becomes oppressed by itself, smothers in itself -T

28. In these sentences the transitive verb "entendre" and the re-
flexive "s' entendre" mean, respectively, to understand one another
to the point of agreement, and to understand in the sense of hear-
ing the meaning. The root tendere means to stretch or move to-
ward something; attendre and entendre, which ran together in Old
French, entail, as Rolland knows, the sense of"to turn one's ear, to
give auditory attention." In the present case, common sense is
rooted in agreement and the understanding based on hearing one
120
 Notes to Pages 93-94
another. Levinas's extensive discussion of"pro-phetism," employed
both in a hyphenated and an unhyphenated form, as what en-
courages speech (pro-phansis) and the speaking of ethical fraternity,
is like the other side of hearing qua understanding. -Trans.























