 We have not ventured to
write essance as would be required by the history of the language, where
the suffix -ance, deriving from -antia or -entia, gave birth to abstract nouns
of action. We s

But is
the lower lower than the higher?


 And not to not-be; passing
over is not here equivalent to dying. Being 

 Being’s inter­
est takes dramatic form in egoisms struggling with one another, each
against all, in the multiplicity of allergic egoisms which are at war with one
another and are thus together. War is the deed or the drama of the es­
sence’s interest. No entity can await its hour. T

 from which becoming is expelled, a
present largely made up of re-presentations, due to memory and history.

And the ill-kept commitment to recompense virtue and chastise vices, de­
spite the assurances of those who claim it was made for a term more distant
than the distance that separates the heavens from the earth, will accredit
strange rumors about the death of God or the emptiness of the heavens.
No one will believe in their silence.

r remorse 

7
gravity warps space
material density deforms intersubjective space
 Moral impossibility is not of lesser gravity; it does
not situate responsibility in some low tension zone, at the confines of being
and non-being. This gravity of the otherwise than being shows now, in a
still confused way, its affinity with ethics. 


saying (the anarchical, the non-original, as we designate it) can be led to
betray itself by showing itself in a theme (if an an-archeology is possible),


 Skepticism, at the dawn of philosophy, set forth and
betrayed the diachrony of this very conveying and betraying. To conceive
the otherwise than being requires, perhaps, as much audacity as skepticism
shows, when it does not hesitate to affirm the impossibility of statement
while venturing to realize this impossibility by the very statement of this
impossibility. If, after the innumerable “irrefutable" refutations which logi­
cal thought sets against it, skepticism has the gall to return (and it always
returns as philosophy’s illegitimate child), it is because in the contradiction
which logic sees in it the “at the same time” of the contradictories is miss­
ing, because a secret diachrony commands this ambiguous or enigmatic
way of speaking, and because in general signification signifies beyond syn­
chrony, beyond essence.

The task is to conceive6 of the possibility of a break out of essence. To
go where? Toward what region


 The essence claims to
recover and cover over every ex-ception - 

has known this subjec­
tivity that, as in an extreme youth, breaks with essence. From Plato’s One
without being to Husserl’s pure Ego, transcendent in immanence, it has
known the metaphysical extraction from being, even if, betrayed by the
said, as by the effect of an oracle, the exception restored to the essence and
to fate immediately fell back into the rules and led only to worlds behind
the scenes. The Nietzschean man above all was such a moment. For Hus­
serl’s transcendental reduction will a putting between parentheses
suffice-a type of writing, of commiting oneself with the world, which
sticks like ink to the hands that push it off? One should have to go all the
way to the nihilism of Nietzsche’s poetic writing, reversing irreversible time
in vortices, to the laughter which refuses language.

10
A linear regressive movement, a retrospective back along the temporal
series toward a very remote past, would never be able to reach the abso­
lutely diachronous pre-original which cannot be recuperated by memory
and history

 in the astonishing human fraternity in which fra­
ternity, conceived with Cain’s sober coldness, would not by itself explain
the responsibility between separated beings it calls for. T

 “prior to every memory,”

 But is not the relationship with this pre-original a recuperation?

 . No one is good voluntarily.

plusperfect past avoir
 Immemorial, unrepresentable, invisible, the past that bypasses the pres­
ent, the pluperfect past, falls into a past that is a gratuitous lapse


 Other, for another freedom, the negativity of
this anarchy, this refusal of the present, of appearing, of the immemorial,
commands me and ordains me to the other, to the first one on the scene,
and makes me approach him, makes me his neighbor. I

 That trace lights up as the face of a neighbor, ambiguously him
before whom (or to whom, without any paternalism) and him fo r whom I
answer. For such is the enigma or ex-ception of a face, judge and accused.

The infinite wipes out its traces not in order to trick him who obeys,

There is a paradox in respon­
sibility, in that I am obliged without this obligation having begun in me, as
though an order slipped into my consciousness like a thief, smuggled itself
in, like an effect of one of Plato’s wandering causes. 

 As a substitution of one for another, as me, a
man, I am not a transubstantiation, a changing from one substance into
another, 1 do not shut myself up in another identity, I do not rest in a new
avatar. As signification, proximity, s

re reversion response
 recollection 

 be recuperated by representation 
The response which is responsibility,

18
d thus heal the break marked by the hypostasis

, because this alterity is incumbent on
me with a whole charge of indigence and weakness. 

 Arising at the apex of essence, goodness is other
than being. It no longer keeps accounts; it is not like negativity, which
conserves what it negates, in its history. It destroys without leaving souve­
nirs, without transporting into museums the altars raised to the idols of the
past for blood sacrifices, it burns the sacred groves in which the echoes of
the past reverberate. The exceptional, extra-ordinary, transcendent charac­
ter of goodness is due to just this break with being and history. 

. To reduce men to self-
consciousness and self-consciousness to the concept, t

s, although the themes in which these con­
cepts present themselves do not lend themselves to linear exposition, and
cannot be really isolated from one another without projecting their shad­
ows and their reflections on one another

he amphibology 

 Unless, that is, the naivety
of the philosopher not call, beyond the reflection on oneself, for the cri­
tique exercized by another philosopher, whatever be the imprudences that
that one will have committed in his turn, and the gratuity of his own say­
ing. Philosophy thus arouses a drama between philosophers and an inter-
subjective movement which does not resemble the dialogue of teamworkers
in science, nor even the Platonic dialogue which is the reminiscence of a
drama rather than the drama itself. It is sketched out in a different struc­
ture; empirically it is realized as the history of philosophy in which new
interlocutors always enter who have to restate, but in which the former
ones take up the floor to answer in the interpretations they arouse, and in
which, nonetheless, despite this lack of “certainty in one’s movements” or
because of it, no one is allowed a relaxation of attention or a lack of
strictness

ex - position exposition 


shows itself, in truth, under the name of being? And who looks?
What shows itself under the name being? This name is not unequivocal.
Is it a noun or a verb

 designate? No doubt it does designate. But does it only designate?
For if it only designates, then, even taken as a verb, it is a noun. And the
process captured by the designation, even if it is a movement, shows itself,
but is immobilized and fixed in the said. 

 epiphenomenal)


 The
folding back of being upon itself, and the self formed by this fold, where
the effect of being remains correlative with being, also does not go to the
crux of subjectivity
folding back of being upon itself "not enough"

25
NOT -- negative 


 the latent birth of
consciousness itself as a perception or listening in to being,

 The “birth” of being in the questioning where the cognitive
subject stands would thus refer to a before the questioning, to the anarchy
of responsibility, as it were on this side of all birth. W

27
 assembling the dispersion of duration into
nouns and propositions, lets being and entities be heard

 “me
whose voice you find in your memories,” or “me

? Can he that looks place himself outside
of the Absolute, and the look withdraw from the event of being, by hollow­
ing out the fold of inwardness, in which knowledge is deposited, accumu­
lates and is formulated? But


r this ex-ception of inwardness be recuperated, 
 respiration o
  inflexion of this exhibition. T

reverter  
first second

ediscovery, recall, reminiscence, reuniting under the unity of appercep­
tion. There is remission of time and tension of the recapture, relaxation

precisely re-presentation, that is, a distancing in
which the present of truth is already or still is; for a representation is a
recommencement of the present which in its “first time” is for the second
time; it is a retention and a protention, between forgetting and expecting,
between memory and project. 

me voici 
, but resounds for the “eye that listens,”

the materiality of a v\rf. T

 altered, is “protaining” and “retaining”!

 retention of
retention, and so on. Then memory recuperates in images what retention

be recuperated. 

indifferent to protention (“generation has no seed!), b

of re-presentation, is paradoxically surmounted in the consciousness of the
present.14

its power to surprise


33-4
 A putting the self-identity of the living present out of
phase, a putting of the phases themselves out of phase, in the intentionality
of retentions and protentions, the flow looks like a multiplication of modi­
fication dispersing from the living present. In Husserl the time structure of
sensibility is a time of what can be recuperated

 through the “synthesis of apprehension
in intuition” (that is, in the sensible becoming cognition), and by the syn­
thesis of “recognition in imagination,” the impression is temporalized and
opens upon itself.
Rather than being a metaphor taken from the movement of waters in a
river, would not flowing be the very temporality of time and the “science”
of which “consciousness” (conscience) is made?

by a sort of diastasis of the punctual, putting itself out of phase
with itself-is neither an attribute nor a predicate expressing a causality
“sensed” as a sensation. 

The verb understood as a noun designating an event, when applied to the
temporalization of time, would make it resound as an event, whereas every
event already presupposes time. Time’s modification without change, the
putting of the identical out of phase with itself, teems behind the transfor­
mations and the endurance, and, as ageing, even within endurance. And
yet a verb perhaps comes into its very verbalness by ceasing to name
actions and events, ceasing to name.

making its essence vibrate.
Language is thus not reducible to a system of signs doubling up beings
and relations; that conception would be incumbent on us if words were
nouns. 

But language is also a system of nouns. Denomination designates or
constitutes identities in the verbal or temporal flow of sensation. Through
the opening that temporalization works in the sensible, disclosing it by its
very passing, assembling it by retention and memory (an assembling which
Kant caught sight of in the diverse syntheses of the imagination, before
every idealization of the sensible), the word identifies “this as that,” states
the ideality of the same in the diverse. This identification is a supplying
with meaning: “this as that.” In their meaning entities show themselves to
be identical unities. “The consciousness of time is the originary locus of the
constitution of the unity of identity in general,” Husserl writes.19 The
“identical unities” are not given or thematized

 resemblance.
ver the reflexion which, in its reflection, 

36
 Before all
receptivity an already said before languages exposes or, in all the sense of
the term, signifies (proposes and orders) experience, giving to historical lan­
guages spoken by peoples a locus, enabling them to orient or polarize the
diversity of the thematized as they choose

 Language has been in operation,
and the saying that bore this said, but goes further, was absorbed and died
in the said, was inscribed. 

. As the time narrated becomes,
in the narrative and in writing, a reversible time, every phenomenon is
said, characterized by the simultaneity of the successive in a theme. I

These rediscov­
eries are an identification - of this as this or as that.

 It would take up a position
with regard to this “something," fixed in a present, re-present it to itself,
and thus extract it from the labile character of time. 


For the lapse of time is also something irrecuperable, refractory to the
simultaneity of the present, something unrepresentable, immemorial, pre-
historical. Before the syntheses of apprehension and recognition, the abso­
lutely passive “synthesis” of ageing is effected. Through it time passes (se
passe). 

 Once again for
the “listening eye” a silence resounds about what had been muffled, the
silence of the parcelling out of being, by which entities in their identities
are illuminated and show themselves.


“the red reddens” the verb does not signify an event, some dynamism of
the red opposed to its rest as a quality, or some activity of the red, for
example, turning red, the passage from non-red to red or from less red to
more red, an alteration. Nor in the verb to redden is there stated some
metaphor of action or alteration, founded on an analogy with the dyna­
mism of action, which would have the preeminent right to be designated by
a verb.

 If being’s essence is spelled
out, scanned, resounds or temporalizes in the verb to be and thereby
becomes discourse and apophansis, this is not by analogy with actions and
processes (in which the massive turns into energy), which verbs would first
designate. It is the verbalness of the verb that resounds in the predicative
proposition; the dynamism of entities is designated and expressed by verbs
secondarily, by reason of its privileged exposure in time

Apophansis - the red reddens, or A is A - does not double up the real.

e. The nominalized adjective is first understood as
an essence, and a temporalization properly so called, in predication.

The said, as a verb,
is the essence of essence. Essence i

40
The noun that doubles up the entity it names is necessary for its identity.
And so also the verb: not only is it not the name of being, but in the
predicative proposition it is the very resonance of being understood as
being. Temporalization resounds as essence in the apophansis.
Language qua said can then be conceived as a system of nouns identify­
ing entities, and then as a system of signs doubling up the beings, designat­
ing substances, events and relations by substantives or other parts of
speech derived from substantives, designating identities - in sum, designat­
ing. B

not as a result of psychologi­
cal reflection about subjectivity and the temporality of sensation, but out
of art. Art is the pre-eminent exhibition in which the said is reduced to a
pure theme, to absolute exposition, even to shamelessness capable of hold­
ing all looks for which it is exclusively destined.

 in the essential renewal of
art, colors, forms, sounds, words, buildings - already on the verge of being
identified as entities, already disclosing their nature and their qualities in
the substantives that bear adjectives — recommence being

 Music, for example in Xena­
kis’ “Nomos Alpha for Unaccompanied Cello,” bends the quality of the
notes emitted into adverbs. Every quiddity becomes a modality, the strings
and woods turn into sonority. What is taking place? Is a soul complaining
or exulting in the depth of the sounds that break up or between the notes
which hitherto in their identities succeeded one another and contributed to
the harmony of the whole, silencing their grating, but which now no longer
melt into a melodic line? 

But it does so in isolation: every work of art is in this sense exotic,
without a world, essence in dissemination. T

 The essence prop­
erly so-called, is the verb, the logos, that resounds in the prose of
predicative propositions. The exegesis is 

Predication makes the time of essence be heard.

 The exposition of
the temporal diastasis, that is, the exposition of exposition, exposition of
the phenomenality of phenomena, is the verb stated in a predicative
proposition

 to be, the verb par excellence in which essence resounds, is
exposed, is nominalized, becomes a word designating and sanctioning
identities, assembling time (and that which modulated the temporalization
of time in the apophansis, such as adverbs) into a conjuncture. T

 in a tale, is synchronized, presented, lends itself
to a noun, receives a title.

 But they are still in an amphibology:

43
at essence exposes and is exposed, t
extent 
reflexive
The
responsibility for another is precisely a saying prior to anything said. The
surprising saying which is a responsibility for another is against “the winds
and tides” of being, is an interruption of essence, a disinterestedness
imposed with a good violence. 

 It must spread out and assemble itself into essence, posit
itself, be hypostasized, 

 the light that occurs not congeal
into essence what is beyond essence, and that the hypostasis of an eon not
be set up as an idol. P

d, contesting the abdication of the
saying that everywhere occurs in this said, thus maintains the diachrony in
which, holding its breath, the spirit hears the echo of the otherwise

, arousing an appear­
ing, and then, in themes that arouse nouns and verbs, operating the “put­
ting together," the synchronization or structure - the putting into a world
and putting into a history for a historiography? Saying signifies otherwise
than as an apparitor presenting essence and entities. This is one of the
central theses of the present text

 consciousness: in the correlation of saying and said the
said is understood as a noema of an intentional act, language contracts
into thought, into thought which conditions speaking, thought that in the
said shows itself to be an act supported by a subject, an entity as it were
put in the “nominative,” in a proposition. The

er. Being, the verb of a
proposition, is, to be sure, a theme, but it makes essence resound without
entirely deadening the echo of the saying that bears it and brings it to light.
This resonance is always ready to congeal into nouns, where being will be
congealed into a copula and the Sachverhalt “nominalized.” But the apo­
phansis is still a modality of saying. The predicative statement - a metalan­
guage necessary for the intelligibility of its own jetsam in a state of
dissemination, and of its integral nominalization in mathematics - stands
on the frontier of a dethematization of the said, and can be understood as
a modality of approach and contact.32 

“in the memory of man” has never been contracted, and
is found to be at the mercy of the freedom and the fate, unverifiable
by me, of the other man. 

 There is an abandon of the sovereign and active subjectivity, of
undeclined self-consciousness, as the subject in the nominative form in an
apophansis

 The “giving out of signs”
would amount to a prior representation of these signs, as though speaking
consisted in translating thoughts into words and consequently in having
been first for-oneself and at home with oneself,\ like a substantial consis­
tency. The relationship with the other would then extend forth as an inten-
tionality, 

On the hither side of the ambiguity of being
and entities, prior to the said, saying uncovers the one that speaks, not as
an object disclosed by theory, but in the sense that one discloses oneself by
neglecting one’s defenses, leaving a shelter, exposing oneself to outrage, to
insults and wounding. But saying is a denuding of denuding, a giving a
sign of its very signifyingness, an expression of exposure, a hyperbolic pas­
sivity that disturbs the still waters, in which, without saying, passivity
would be crawling with secret designs. There is denuding of denuding,
without this “reflection” or this iteration having to be added afterwards to
the denuding. The passivity of the exposure responds to an assignation
that identifies me as the unique one, not by reducing me to myself, but by
stripping me of every identical quiddity, and thus of all form, all investi­
ture, which would still slip into the assignation. The saying signifies this
passivity; in the saying this passivity signifies, becomes signifyingness,
exposure in response t o . . . , being at the question before any interroga­
tion, any problem, without clothing, without a shell to protect oneself,
stripped to the core as in an inspiration of air, an ab-solution to the one, the
one without a complexion. It is a denuding beyond the skin, to the wounds
one dies from, denuding to death,35 being as a vulnerability. It is a fission
of the nucleus opening the bottom of its punctual nuclearity, like to a lung
at the core of oneself. The nucleus does not open this depth as long as it
remains protected by its solid crust, by a form, not even when it is reduced
to its punctuality, for it identifies itself in the temporality of its essence,
and thus covers itself over again. The limit of the stripping bare, in the
punctual core, has to continue to be torn from itself. The one assigned has
to open to the point of separating itself from its own inwardness, adhering
to esse; it must be dis-interested. This being torn up from oneself in the
core of one’s unity, this absolute noncoinciding, this diachrony of the
instant, signifies in the form of one-penetrated-by-the-other. The pain, this
underside of skin, is a nudity more naked than all destitution. 


Saying is a denuding, of the unqualifiable one, the pure someone, unique
and chosen; t

 an “otherwise than being” which turns into
a “for the other,” bu

” The reverting
of the ego into a self, the de-posing or de-situating of the ego, is the very
modality of dis-interestedness. It has th

51
s the susceptibility to being
hurt, a self uncovered, exposed and suffering in its skin. In its skin it is
stuck in its skin, not having its skin to itself, a vulnerability. Pain is not
simply a symptom of a frustrated will, its meaning is not adventitious.

This anarchy, this refusal to be assembled into a representation, has its
own way to concern me: the lapse. But the lapse of time irrecuperable in
the temporalization of time is not only negative like the immemorial.

52
. Time passes (se passe). This
synthesis which occurs patiently, called with profundity passive synthesis,
is ageing. It breaks up under the weight of years, and is irreversibly
removed from the present, that is, from re-presentation. In self-
consciousness there is no longer a presence of self to self, but senescence

 The identity of the
same in the ego comes to it despite itself from the outside, as an election or
an inspiration, in the form of the uniqueness of someone assigned. 

53
The nominal form, the form
of the term as a term, of the one in this term, is irreducible to the verbal
form. This nominal form comes from somewhere else than the verbalness
of essence.38 It is inseparable from the appeal one cannot elude, the assig­
nation. Its irreducibility to a verb, even the verb to be, is significant. The
subject as a term, as a noun, is someone.

55
Here imminence does not designate a pure possibility in neutrality.
Imminence as pain arises in sensibility lived as well-being and enjoyment.
If the for-another is a despite-oneself, if this despite-oneself is not a pure
undergoing, the pure and simple passivity of an effect, if in a sense it is
more humble than undergoing, and thus concerns the subject that under­
goes in its uniqueness, this is because the for-another arises in the enjoy­
ment in which the ego is affirmed, is complacent, and posits itself.

56
ts full meaning only in stripping me of what is
more my own than possession. Pain penetrates into the very heart of the
for-oneself that beats in enjoyment, in the life that is complacent in itself,
that lives of its life.42 To give, to-be-for-another, despite oneself, but in
interrupting the for-oneself, is to take the bread out of one’s own mouth,
to nourish the hunger of another with one’s own fasting. The for-another
characteristic of sensibility is enacted already in the enjoy

e. The One
 Exposedness is the one-in-responsibility,
and thus the one in its uniqueness, stripped of all protection that would
multiply it. 

 a pronomination; there is nothing that is named /; the I is said by him
that speaks. The pronoun already dissimulates the unique one that is
speaking, subsumes it under a concept. But it designates only the mask or
the person of the unique one, the mask that leaves the 1 evading concepts,
the I involved in saying in the first person, absolutely unconvertible into a
noun. F

The uniqueness of the chosen or required one, who is not a chooser, is a
passivity not being converted into spontaneity. This uniqueness not
assumed, not subspronoun already dissimulates the unique one that is
speaking, subsumeumed, is traumatic; it is an election in persecution.

This diachrony of the subject is not
a metaphor.

 The dogmatism of mathematical and dialectical relations (attenu­
ated only by a strange sensitivity for a certain apocalyptic poetry) is taken
as necessary to exclude from the play of structures, called science (and still
bound to being by the very rules of the game), the extreme possibilities of
human significations, extra-vagant for precisely leading to something like
issues. In these significations, far from any game and more strictly than in
being itself, men stand who h

 1 am then called upon in
my uniqueness as someone for whom no one else can substitute himself.
One can ask if anything in the world is less conditioned than man, in

 that continue to mark the sober de­
scription of the human sciences, in order to account for the impossible
indifference with regard to the human which does not succeed in dissimu­
lating itself in the incessant discourse about the death of God, the end of
man and the disintegration of the world (no one is able to minimize the
chances of that), but in which the wreckage preceding the catastrophe
itself, like rats abandoning the ship before the shipwreck, come to us in the
already insignificant signs of a language in dissemination.


The exposedness to affec­
tion, vulnerability, has doubtless not the signification of reflecting being.


responsbilltiy
re-sponse
what is the sponse for (history others)

 It is pleasure,
that is, the complacency in itself of life loving life even in suicide. T

Then there is produced in this vulnerabil­
ity the reversal whereby the other inspires the same, pain, an overflowing
of meaning by nonsense. Then sense bypasses nonsense - that sense which
is the-same-for-the-other. 

65
 Axiology becomes a
“cognition” of values or of what ought to be, and practice becomes the
cognition of what is to be done or of usage objects. 

67
an inspiration, that is,
alterity in the same, the trope of the body animated by the soul, psyche in
the form of a hand that gives even the bread taken from its own mouth.
Here the psyche is the maternal body.


The psyche involved in intentionality does not lie in consciousness o f . . . ,
its power to thematize, or in the “truth of Being,”

 Formulas like
“every consciousness is a consciousness of something” and “every
perception is a perception of the perceived” can be understood in
this synchronic sense and express the most flat banalties, taking their
meaning from a system, signifying in function of its more or less worked
out articulation. The meaning of perception, hunger, sensation, etc. as
notions signifies through the correlation of terms in the simultaneity of a
linguistic system. It has to be distinguished from the signifyingness of the-
one-for-the-other, the psyche that animates perception, hunger and sensa­
tion. Here animation is not a metaphor, but, if we can put it thus, a
designation of the irreducible paradox of intelligibility: the other in the
same, the trope of the for-the-other in its antecedent inflexion. This signi­
fication in its very signifyingness, outside of every system, before any corre­
lation, is an accord or peace between planes which, as soon as they are
thematized, make an irreparable cleavage, like vowels in a dieresis, main­
taining a hiatus without elision. They then mark two Cartesian orders, the
body and the soul, which have no common space where they can touch,
and no logical lopos where they can form a whole. Yet they are in accord
prior to thematization, in an accord, a chord, which is possible only as an
arpeggio. Far from negating intelligibility, this kind of accord is the very
rationality 

! This opening up, like a
reverse conatus, an inversion of essence, is a relationship across an abso­
lute difference. 

Animation is not better expressed by the metaphor of inhabitation, the
presence of a pilot in the helm of his boat, a vital principle immediately
assimilated with a directive principle, or the virility of a logos and a
command. Animation can be understood as an exposure to the other, the
passivity of the for-the-other in vulnerability, which refers to maternity,
which sensibility signifies.

 It is a passivity more passive still than any passivity that is
antithetical to an act, a nudity more naked than all “academic” nudity,
exposed to the point of outpouring, effusion and prayer. It is a passivity
that is not reducible to exposure to another’s gaze. It is a vulnerability and
a paining exhausting themselves like a hemorrhage, denuding even the
aspect that its nudity takes on, exposing its very exposedness, expressing
itself, speaking, uncovering even the projection that the very form of
identity confers upon 

 an Erfullung, or a deception of consciousness
o f . . . implies a hunger, which, without constituting the ultimate sense of
the sensibility, still troubles the sensation now become a knowing. In a
gustative sensation there is not produced some covering over of the sense
aimed at by its illustration, by a presence “in flesh and bone.” In it a
hunger is satisfied. To fill, to satisfy, is the sense of the savor, and it is
precisely to leap over the images, aspects, reflections or silhouettes,
phantoms, phantasms, the hides of things that are enough for the
consciousness o f . . . . The emptiness of hunger is emptier than all curiosity,
cannot be compensated for with the mere hearsay of what it demands. This
leap over the images devours the distance more radically than when the
distance between a subject and its object is suppressed. A sinking in that
never goes far enough, the impatience of being sated by which it has to be
defined, can be discerned in the fusion of the sensing and the sensed. T

content
Savor inasmuch as it satisfies a hunger, savor as quenching, is
a breaking up of the form of a phenomenon which becomes amorphous
and turns into “prime matter.” Matter carries on, “does its job” of being
matter, “materializes” in the satisfaction, which fills an emptiness before
putting itself into a form and presenting itself to the knowing of this
materiality and the possession of it in the form of goods.7 Tasting is first
satisfaction. Matter “materializes” in satisfaction, which, over and beyond
any intentional relationship of cognition or possession, of “taking in one’s
hands,” means “biting i nt o. . . . ” It is irreducible to a taking in one’s
hands, for it is already an absorption of a “within” including the ambiguity
of two inwardnesses: that of a recipient of spatial forms, and that of an ego
assimilating the other in its identity, and coiling in over itself.

 It is not a gift of the heart, but of the
bread from one’s mouth, of one’s own mouthful of bread. It is the open­
ness, not only of one’s pocketbook, but of the doors of one’s home, a
“sharing of your bread with the famished,” a "welcoming of the wretched
into your house” (Isaiah 58). The immediacy of the sensibility is the for-
the-other of one’s own materiality; it is the immediacy or the proximity of
the other. The proximity of the other is the immediate opening up for the
other of the immediacy of enjoyment, the immediacy of taste

 It is not a gift of the heart, but of the
bread from one’s mouth, of one’s own mouthful of bread. It is the open­
ness, not only of one’s pocketbook, but of the doors of one’s home, a
“sharing of your bread with the famished,” a "welcoming of the wretched
into your house” (Isaiah 58). The immediacy of the sensibility is the for-
the-other of one’s own materiality; it is the immediacy or the proximity of
the other. The proximity of the other is the immediate opening up for the
other of the immediacy of enjoyment, the immediacy of taste

writhing in the tight dimensions of pain, the unsuspected dimensions of the
hither side. It is being torn up from oneself, being less than nothing, a
rejection into the negative, behind nothingness; it is maternity, gestation of
the other in the same. Is not the restlessness of someone persecuted but a
modification of maternity, the groaning of the wounded entrails by those it
will bear or has borne? In maternity what signifies is a responsibility for
others, to the point of substitution for others and suffering both from the
effect of persecution and from the persecuting itself in which the persecutor
sinks. Maternity, which is bearing par excellence, bears even responsibility
for the persecuting by the persecutor

. Such a moment, when awakened by memory,
would become, after the event, the instant of an alliance made in full free­
dom. Such a reduction refuses the irreducible anarchy of responsibility for
another.
Maternity, vulnerability, responsibility, proximity, contact - sensibility
can slip toward touching, palpation, openness u p o n . . . , consciousness
o f . . . , pure knowing taking images from the “intact being,” informing
itself about the palpable quiddity of things.10

 The
sensible - maternity, vulnerability, apprehension - binds the node of incar­
nation into a plot larger than the apperception of self. In this plot I am
bound to others before being tied to my body. Intentionality, t

77
 that commands in the ungrasp-
able noesis its own transcendental origin. Sensible experience as an
obsession by the other, or a maternity, is already the corporeality which
the philosophy of consciousness wishes to constitute on the basis of it. The
corporeality of one’s own body signifies, as sensibility itself, a knot or a
denouement of being, but it has also to contain a passage to the physico­
chemical-physiological meanings of the body. And this latter does devolve
from sensibility as proximity, as signification, as one-for-the-other, which
signifies in giving, when giving offers not the superfluxion of the super­
fluous, but the bread taken from one’s own mouth. Signification signifies,
consequently, in nourishing, clothing, lodging, in maternal relations, in
which matter shows itself for the first time in its materiality.

nd first non-spatial. It is because subjectivity is sensi­
bility - an exposure to others, a vulnerability and a responsibility in the
proximity of the others, the-one-for-the-other, that is, signification - and
because matter is the very locus of the for-the-other, the way that significa­
tion signifies before showing itself as a said in the system of synchronism,
the linguistic system, that a subject is of flesh and blood, a man that is
hungry and eats, entrails in a skin, and thus capable of giving the bread
out of his mouth, or giving his skin.

At least no escape is possible with impunity. 

that is, in the
last analysis, the subject self-consciousness and origin, arche, to which
Western philosophy leads. Whatever be the abyss that separates the psyche
of the ancients from the consciousness of the moderns, both belong to a
tradition in which intelligibility derives from the assembling of terms united
in a system for a locutor that states an apophansis 

. As
a sensibility, of flesh and blood, I am on the hither side of the amphibology
of being and entities, the non-thematizable, the non-unitable by synthesis.


Would proximity be a certain measure of the interval narrowing between
two points or two sectors of space, toward a limit of contiguity and even
coincidence? But then the term proximity would have a relative meaning
and, in the space inhabited by Euclidean geometry, a derivative sense. Its

 In fact, the impassiveness of space
refers to the absolute coexistence, to the conjunction of all the points,
being together at all points without any privilege, characteristic of the
words of a language before the mouth opens.

 This surplus or
this lack throws me outside of the objectivity characteristic of relations.
Does relationship here become religion? It is not simply 

 Does it not feel that any kinship with
that of which it is conscious compromises its truth?
The approach is precisely an implication of the approaching one in fra­
ternity. When it becomes conscious, that is, thematized, the indifferent
approach destroys this kinship, like a caress surprising itself to be a palpa­
tion, or recovering possession of itself. The subjectivity of the approaching
subject is then preliminary, anarchic, prior

84
 Who then came to wound the subject, so
that he should expose his thoughts or expose himself in his saying? He is
subject to being affected by the other, and this being affected, by reason of
its very irreversibility, does not change into a universal thought. T

Not to turn into relations that reverse, irreversibility, is the
universal subjectness of the subject. 

 Absolving himself from all
essence, all genus, all resemblance, the neighbor, the first one on the scene,
concerns me for the first time (even if he is an old acquaintance, an old
friend, an old lover, long caught up in the fabric of my social relations

 His extreme singularity is precisely his assignation; he assigns me
before 1 designate him as rode rt.

, all commitment con­
sented to or refused. I am bound to him, him who is, however, the first one
on the scene, not signalled, unparalleled; I am bound to him before any
liaison contracted. He orders me before being recognized. Here there is a
relation of kinship outside of all biology, “against all logic.”

 Obligations are disproportionate to any commit­
ment taken or to be taken or to be kept in a present. In a sense nothing is
more burdensome than a neighbor. Is not this desired one the undesirable
itself?  The neighbor who could not leave me indifferent, the undesirable
desired one, has not revealed to desire the ways of access to him, as the
maternal milk was able to inscribe the movements of sucking in the
instincts of the newly born. 

. Not because it is
too brutal to appear, but because in a sense too weak, non-phenomenon
because less than a phenomenon. The disclosing of a face is nudity, non­
form, abandon of self, ageing, dying, more naked than nudity. It is pov­
erty, skin with wrinkles, which are a trace of itself. 

. It is a thinness already reduced to the alternating of
sense, the ambiguity of a phenomenon and its defect,28 poverty exposed in
the formless, and withdrawn from this absolute exposure in a shame for its
poverty. 

 were the trace of its own withdrawal, a languor still seeking, like an
absence which, however, could not be more there. The caress is the not
coinciding proper to contact, a denuding never naked enough. The neigh­
bor does not satisfy the approach. The tenderness of skin is the very gap
between approach and approached, a disparity, a non-intentionality, a
non-teleology. Whence the disorder of caresses,30 the diachrony, a pleasure
without present, pity, painfulness. Proximity, immediacy, is to enjoy and
to suffer by the other. But I can enjoy and suffer by the other only because
I am-for-the-other, am

. It is as though I were responsible for his mortality,
and guilty for surviving. A face is an anachronous immediacy more tense
than that of an image offered in the straightforwardness of an intuitive
intention. In proximity the absolutely other, the stranger whom I have
“neither conceived nor given birth to,” I already have on my arms, already
bear, according to the Biblical formula, “in my breast as the nurse bears
the nurseling.”32 He has no other place, is not autochthonous, is uprooted,
without a country, not an inhabitant, exposed to the cold and the heat of
the seasons. To be reduced to having recourse to me is the homelessness or
strangeness of the neighbor. It is incumbent on me.

. Must we call creature status his
“hither side,” which a being retains no trace of, this hither side older than
the plot of egoism woven in the eonatus of being?

But it is always to be
coram, disturbed in oneself to the point of no longer having any intention,
exposed over and beyond the act of exposing oneself, answering for this
very exposedness, expressing oneself, speaking. It is to be an undeclinable
One, speaking, that is, exposing one’s very exposedness. The act of speak­
ing is the passivity in passivity. T

95
f God; one can seek to seat the religious on a
philosophy of the unity and totality of being called Spirit, and to this unity
which ensures the efficacity of God in the world, sacrifice transcendence,
despite the inversions of the totality into totalitarianism.

” Despite the extension which phenomenology
gives the word intention, intentionality bears the trace of the voluntary and
the teleological. Signification is signifying out of a lack, a certain negativ­
ity, an aspiration which aims emptily, like a hunger, but in a determinate
way, at the presence which is to satisfy it

The position of the subject in the philosophy issued from Husserl — 


It is as though subjective life in the form of consciousness consisted
in being itself losing itself and finding itself again so as to possess itself by
showing itself, proposing itself as a theme, exposing itself in truth. 


movement of essence, losing itself and finding itself out of an ideal
principle, an dpxv, *

refusal

s the very tran­
scending characteristic of this beyond that is signification. Signification is
the contradictory trope of the-one-for-the-other. The-one-for-the-other is
not a lack of intuition, but the surplus of responsibility. My responsibility
for the other is the fo r of the relationship, the very signifyingness of signi­
fication, which signifies in saying before showing itself in the said. The-one-
for-the-other is the very signifyingness of signification! It is not that the
“beyond” would be “further” than everything that appears,

This formula expresses a way of
being affected which can in no way be invested by spontaneity: the subject
is affected without the source of the affection becoming a theme of rep­
resentation. We have called this relationship irreducible to consciousness
obsession. The relationship with exteriority is “prior” to the act that would
effect it. 

Obsession traverses consciousness countercurrentwise, is inscribed in
consciousness as something foreign, a disequilibrium, a delirium. It undoes
thematization, and escapes any principle, origin, will, or dp*?},which are
put forth in every ray of consciousness. T


deleuze

 Disorder is but another order, and what is diffuse is thematizable.3
Anarchy troubles being over and beyond these alternatives

first, is represented, does not knock without announcing itself, leaves, across
the interval of space and time, the leisure necessary for a welcome. What is
realized in and by intentional consciousness offers itself to protention and di­
verges from itself in retention, so as to be, across the divergency, identified and
possessed. This play in being is consciousness itself: 

RECURRENCE
ss. In the
traditional teaching of idealism, subject and consciousness are equivalent
concepts. The who or the me are not even suspected. This one is a nonrela­
tion, but absolutely a term. Yet this term of an irreversible assignation is
perhaps dissimulated, under the outdated notion of the soul. It is a term
not reducible to a relation, but yet is in recurrence. The ego is in itself like
a sound that would resound in its own echo, the node of a wave which is
not once again consciousness.6 The term in recurrence will be sought here
beyond or on the hither side of consciousness and its play, beyond or on
the hither side of being which it thematizes, outside of being, and thus in
itself as in exile. It will be found under the effect of an expulsion, whose
positive meaning has to be explicated. Under the effect of such an expul­
sion outside of being, it is in itself. There is expulsion in that it assigns me
before I show myself, before I set myself up. I am assigned without
recourse, without fatherland, already sent back to myself, but without
being able to stay there, compelled before commencing. Nothing here
resembles self-consciousness. It has meaning only as an upsurge in me of a
responsibility prior to commitment, that is, a responsibility for the other.
There I am one and irreplaceable, o



. For Sartre as for Hegel, the oneself is posited on the basis
of the for-itself. The identity of the I would thus be reducible to the turning
back of essence upon itself. The 1, or the oneself that would seem to be its
subject or condition, the oneself taking on the figure of an entity among
entities, would in truth be reducible to an abstraction taken from the con­
crete process of self-consciousness, or from the exposition of being in his­
tory or in the stretching out of time, in which, across breaks and
recoveries, being shows itself to itself. Time, essence, essence as time,
would be the absolute itself in the return to self. The multiplicity of unique

pregnancy metahors
n, illuminating itself thereby like conscious­
ness which lights up by interrupting itself and finding itself again in the
temporal play of retentions and protentions. The oneself does not enter
into that play of exposings and dissimulations which we call a phenomenon
(or phenomenology, for the appearing of a phenomenon is already
a discourse). The oneself takes refuge or is exiled in its own fullness, to the
point of explosion or fission, in view of its own reconstitution in the form
of an identity identified in the said. Verbs, possessive adjectives and the
syntactic figures one would like to use to disarticulate the singular torsion
or contraction of the oneself bear already the mark of the oneself, of this
torsion, this contraction, this fission. That is perhaps also the meaning of
Leibniz’ mysterious formula, “the ego is innate to itself.” The self involved
in maintaining oneself, losing oneself or finding oneself again is not a
result, but the very matrix of the relations or events that these pronomial
verbs express. The evocation of maternity in this metaphor suggests to us
the proper sense of the oneself. Th

105 orphan

ot equal, in a time of birth or creation, of which
nature or creation retains a trace, unconvertible into a memory. Recur­
rence is more past than any rememberable past, any past convertible into a
present. The oneself is a creature, but an orphan by birth or an atheist no
doubt ignorant of its Creator, for if it knew it it would again be taking up
its commencement. The recurrence of the oneself 

The oneself has not issued from its own initiative, as it claims in the
plays and figures of consciousness on the way to the unity of an Idea. In
that Idea, coinciding with itsel

se, by
which, in the amphibology of being and entities, an entity signifies. The
hypostasis is exposed as oneself in the accusative form, before appearing in
the said proper to knowing as the bearer of a name. The metaphor of a
sound that would be audible only in its echo meant to approach this way
of presenting one’s passivity as an underside without a right side.

 The unjustifiable identity of
ipseity is expressed in terms such as ego, I, oneself, and, this work aims to
show throughout, starting with the soul, sensibility, vulnerability, mater­
nity and materiality, which describe responsibility for others. 

n. This withdrawal excludes all spontaneity,
and is thus always already effected, already past.

 These negative qualifications of the subjectivity of the oneself do
not consecrate some ineffable mystery, but confirm the presynthetic, pre-
logical and in a certain sense atomic, that is, in-dividual, unity of the self,
which prevents it from splitting, separating itself from itself so as to con­
template or express itself, and thus show itself, if only under a comic mask,
to name itself otherwise than by a pro-noun. This prevention is the positiv­
ity of the one. It is in a certain sense atomic, for it is without any rest in
itself, “more and more one,” to the point of breakup, fission, openness.
That this unity be a torsion and a restlessness, irreducible to the function
that the oneself exercises in the ontology accomplished by consciousness,
which, by the oneself, operates its turning back over itself, presents a prob­
lem. It is as though the atomic unity of the subject were exposed outside by
breathing, by divesting its ultimate substance even to the mucous mem­
brane of the lungs, continually splitting up.

 is not a flight into the void, but a movement into full­
ness, the anguish of contraction and breakup.10 This describes the relation
in which a subject is immolated without fleeing itself, without entering into
ecstasy, without taking a distance from itself, in which it is pursued into
itself, to the hither side of rest in itself, of its coincidence with itself. This
recurrence, which one can, to be sure, call negativity (but a negativity
antecedent to discourse, the unexceptionable homeland of dialectical nega­
tivity), this recurrence by contraction, is the self.

109
 for both points and idealities in their own way presuppose the onto­
logical adventure. This “strange sort of nature” is something on the hither
side, without any reference to thematization, without even references to
references rising in it, like “itch,” without any dialectical germination, quite
sterile and pure, completely cut off from adventure and reminiscence. No
grounds (non-lieu), meanwhile or contra-tempo time (or bad times (mal-
heur)), it is on the hither side of being and of the nothingness which is
thematizable like being.
The expression “in one’s skin” is not a metaphor for the in-itself; it refers
to a recurrence in the dead time or the meanwhile which separates inspira­
tion and expiration, the diastole and systole of the heart beating dully
against the walls of one’s skin. The body is not only an image or figure
here; it is the distinctive in-oneself of the contraction of ipseity and its
breakup.12 This contraction is not an impossibility to forget oneself, to
detach oneself from oneself, in the concern for oneself. It is a recurrence to
oneself out of an irrecusable exigency of the other, a duty overflowing my
being, a duty becoming a debt and an extreme passivity prior to the tran­
quillity, still quite relative, in the inertia and materiality of things at rest. It
is a restlessness and patience that support prior to action and passion.
Here what is due goes beyond having, but makes giving possible. This
recurrence is incarnation. In it the body which makes giving possible
makes one other without alienating. For this other is the heart, and the
goodness, of the same, the inspiration or the very psyche in the soul.

110
this folding back upon oneself proper to ipseity (which does not even
have the virtue of being an act of folding itself, but makes the act of con­
sciousness turning back upon itself possible), this passive folding back,

110-111
 the peace of cemeteries, as though the subjectivity of a
subject meant nothing? Or do the being encumbered with oneself and the
suffering of constriction in one’s skin, better than metaphors, follow the
exact trope of an alteration of essence, which inverts, or would invert, into
a recurrence in which the expulsion of self outside of itself is its substitu­
Ill
tion for the other? Is not that what the self emptying itself of itself would
really mean? This recurrence would be the ultimate secret of the incarna­
tion of the subject; prior to all reflection, prior to every positing, an
indebtedness before any loan, not assumed, ana

e. In the trauma of persecution it is to pass from the outrage
undergone to the responsibility for the persecutor, and, in this sense from
suffering to expiation for the other. Persecution is not something added to
the subjectivity of the subject and his vulnerability; it is the very movement
of recurrence. The subjectivity as the other in the same, as an inspiration,
is the putting into question of all affirmation for-oneself, all egoism born
again in this very recurrence. (This putting into question is not a prevent­
ing!) The subjectivity of a subject is responsibility of being-in-question15 in
the form of the total exposure to offence in the cheek offered to the smiter.

. Everything is from the start in the accusative.
Such is the exceptional condition or unconditionality of the self, the signi­
fication of the pronoun self for which our Latin grammars themselves
know no nominative form.


113
 Then what is the object of the exposition developed to this
point? We have answered this question in advance with the notion of
substitution.

Thus in the concept of creation ex nihilo, if it is
not a pure nonsense, there is the concept of a passivity that does not revert
into an assumption. The self as a creature is conceived in a passivity more

114
so as to reintegrate it in a free responsibility, the responsibility for the
other, the responsibility in obsession, suggests an absolute passivity of a
self that has never been able to diverge from itself, to then enter into its
limits, and identify itself by recognizing itself in its past. Its recurrence is
the contracting of an ego, going to the hither side of identity, gnawing
away at this very identity - identity gnawing away at itself-in a remorse.


 But viewed out of the obsession of passivity, of itself
anarchical, there is brought out, behind the equality of consciousness, an
inequality. This inequality does not signify an inadequation of the appar­
ent being with the profound or sublime being, nor a return to an original
innocence (s

next day. It signifies a
uniqueness, under assignation, of responsibility, and because of this assig­
nation not finding any rest in itself. The self without a concept, unequal in
identity, signifies itself in the first person, setting forth the plane of saying,
pro-ducing itself in saying as an ego or as me, that is, utterly different from
any other ego, that is, having a meaning despite death. Contrary to the
ontology of death this self opens an order in which death can be not recog­
nized. An identity in diastasis, where coinciding is wanting

116 
es its gravity. It is as resting on a self, support­
ing the whole of being, that being is assembled into a unity of the universe
and essence is assembled into an event. The self is a sub-jectum \ it is under
the weight of the universe, responsible for everything.

118
All the transfers of feeling, with which the theorists of original war and
egoism explain the birth of generosity (it is, however, not certain that war
was at the beginning, before the altars), would not succeed in being fixed in
the ego if it were not with its whole being, or rather with its whole dis­
interestedness, subjected not, like matter, to a category, but to the unlimit­
ed accusative of persecution. The self, a hostage, is already substituted for
the others. “I am an other,” but this is not the alienation Rimbaud refers
to. I am outside of any place, in myself, on the hither side of the autonomy
of auto-affection and identity resting on itself. Impassively undergoing the
weight of the other, thereby called to uniqueness, 

 In expiation, the responsibility for the others, the relation­
ship with the non-ego, precedes any relationship of the ego with itself. The
relationship with the other precedes the auto-affection of certainty, to
which one always tries to reduce communication.


 The
overemphasis of openness is responsibility for the other to the point of
substitution, where the for-the-other proper to disclosure, to monstration
to the other, turns into the for-the-other proper to responsibility.
y. This is
the thesis of the present work.

, independent of the description hitherto elaborated. The
ethical situation of responsibility is not comprehensible on the basis of
ethics. It does indeed arise from what Alphonse de Waelhens called non-
philosophical experiences, which are ethically independent. The constraint
that does not presuppose the will, nor even the core of being from which
the will arises (or which it breaks up), and that we have described starting
with persecution, has its place between the necessity of “what cannot be
otherwise” (Aristotle, Metaphysics, E), of 

121
Then obsession is subordinated to a
principle that is stated in a theme, which annuls the very anarchy of its
movement.25 The trace in which a face is ordered is not reducible to a sign:
a sign and its relationship with the signified are synchronic in a theme. The
approach is not the thematization of any relationship, but is this very rela­
tionship, which resists thematization as anarchic. To thematize this rela­
tion is already to lose it, to leave the absolute passivity of the self. 

121-2
The views that have been expounded can then not be reproached for the
imprudence of affirming that the first word of the “mind," that which
makes all the others possible, and even the words “negativity” and “con­
122
sciousness,” would be naive unconditioned “Yes” of submission, negating
truth, and all the highest values! The unconditionality of this yes is not
that of an infantile spontaneity. It is the very exposure to critique, the
exposure prior to consent, more ancient than any naive spontaneity. We
have been accustomed to reason in the name of the freedom of the ego - as
though I had witnessed the creation of the world, and as though I could
only have been in charge of a world that would have issued out of
my free will. These are presumptions of philosophers, 

 The “lateness” is not insignificant. 

  the necessity that the Good choose me first before I can be in
a position to choose, that is, welcome its choice. That is my pre-originary
susceptiveness. It is a passivity prior to all receptivity, it is transcendent. It
is an antecendence prior to all representable antecendence: immemorial.
The Good is before being. 

124
 And the proximity of the neighbor in its trauma does not only
strike up against me, but exalts and elevates me, and, in the literal sense of
the term, inspires me. Inspiration, heteronomy, is the very pneuma of the
psyche. Freedom is borne by the responsibility it could not shoulder, an
elevation and inspiration without complacency. The for-the-other charac­
teristic of the subject can be interpreted neither as a guilt complex (which
presupposes an initial freedom), nor as a natural benevolence or divine
"instinct," nor as some love or some tendency to sacrifice. This is quite the
opposite of the Fichtean conception, w

. The self-accusation of remorse gnaws away at the closed
and firm core of consciousness, opening it, fissioning it. 

126
e. But to say
that the other has to sacrifice himself to the others would be to preach
human sacrifice! “Me” is not an inimitable nuance of Jemeinigkeit that
would be added on to a being belonging to the genus “soul” or “man” or
“individual,” and would thus be common to several souls, men and indi­
viduals, making reciprocity possible among them from the first. The unique­
ness of the ego, overwhelmed by the other in proximity, is the 

129
 No doubt nothing is more comical
than the concern that a being has for an existence it could not save from its
destruction, as in Tolstoi’s tale where an order for enough boots for 25
years is sent by one that will die the very evening he gives his order. That is
indeed as absurd as questioning, in view of action, the stars whose verdict
would be without appeal. But through this image one sees that the comical
is also tragic, and that it belongs to the same man to be a tragic and a
comical personage.
The approach, inasmuch as it is a sacrifice, confers a sense on death. In
it the absolute singularity of the responsible one encompasses the general­
ity or generalization of death. In it life is no longer measured by being, and
death can no longer introduce the absurd into it. Death gives lie to plea­
sure, in which for the space of an instant the tragi-comedy is forgotten, and
which would be defined by this forgetting. But despite all its adversity, it is
accorded with the for-the-other of approach. No one is so hypocritical as
to claim that he has taken from death its sting, 


And that is so to the extent that the
manifestation itself, as we have just affirmed, would be a false semblance if
it did not belong to the movement, or the play, that being carries on qua
being. What is more, objectivity, being’s essence revealed in truth, somehow
protects the unfolding of being against the projection of subjective phan­
tasms which would trouble the process or procession of essence.

132
e, it is their grouping, their co­
presence, that is -a n d this is new! - the position of the one with regard to
the other, the relativity in which the one makes a sign to the other, the
reciprocal signifyingness of the one with respect to the other, that is equiv­
alent to the coming to light of qualified quiddities themselves. 

, but no slavery is included in the alienation of the
same who is “for the other.

 The signifyingness of signification is
not brought about as a mode of representation, nor as the symbolic evoca­
tion of an absence, that is, a makeshift or a failing of presence. Nor as an
outdoing of presence, as idealism conceives of subjectivity, wh

. But it is not
what one means by “committed subjectivity.” C

 As the result of a decision freely
taken or consented to, the result of a reverting of susceptiveness into a
project, commitment refers - is there need to repeat this again? - to an
intentional thought, an assumption, a subject open upon a present, 

 The beyond, has meaning only nega­
tively, by its non-sense

138 
 Goodness in the subject is anarchy itself.
As a responsibility for the freedom of the other, it is prior to any freedom
in me, but it also precedes violence in me, which would be the contrary of
freedom. For if no one is good voluntarily, no one is a slave of the Good.

139
 It is an anachronous birth, prior to its own
present, a non-beginning, an anarchy. As a latent birth, it is never a pres­
ence, excluding the present of coinciding with oneself, for it is in contact,
in sensibility, in vulnerability, in exposure to the outrages of the other. T

140
. The latent birth of the subject occurs in an obligation where
no commitment was made. It is a fraternity or complicity for nothing, but
the more demanding that it constrains without finality and without end.
The subject is born in the beginninglessness of an anarchy and in the
endlessness of obligation, gloriously augmenting as though infinity came to
pass in it. In

 Representation does not inte­
grate the responsibility for the other inscribed in human fraternity; human
fraternity does not arise out of any commitment, any principle, that is, any
recallable present. The o


141
 the originary actuality of every
act, source of the spontaneity of the subject or of the subject as a sponta­
neity. This book has exposed my passivity, passivity as the-one-for-the-
other; it transcends essence understood as potency and as act. It is as such
that my passivity is signification. The-one-for-the-other goes to the extent
of the-one-being-hostage-for-the-other. In its identity invoked the one is
irreplaceable, and does not return to itself; in its bearing of itself, it is an
expiation for the other, in its “essence” an ex-ception to essence, or a sub­
stitution.

142

 There is an assignation to an identity for the response of
responsibility, where one cannot have oneself be replaced without fault. To
this command continually put forth only a “here 1 am” (me void) can
answer, where the pronoun “I” is in the accusative, declined before any
declension, possessed by the other, sick,5 identical. Here I am - is saying
with inspiration, which is not a gift for fine words or songs. There is con­
straint to give with full hands, and thus a constraint to corporeality.

 It is the subjectivity of a man of flesh and blood, more passive
in its extradition to the other than the passivity of effects in a causal chain,
for it is beyond the unity of apperception of the I think, which is actuality
itself. 

143
 Saying saying saying itself, without thematizing it, but
exposing it again.

 This is the pre­
reflexive iteration of the saying of this very saying, a statement of the “here
1 am” which is identified with nothing but the very voice that states and
delivers itself, the voice that signifies. But to thus make signs to the point of
making oneself a sign is not a babbling language, like the expression of a
mute, or the discourse of a stranger shut up in his maternal language. It is
the extreme tension of language, the for-the-other of proximity, which
closes in on me from all sides and concerns me even in my identity. 

. The response is put
forth for the other, without any “taking up of attitudes.” This responsibil­
ity is like a cellular irritability; it is the impossibility of being silent, the
scandal of sincerity.7

Sincerity in which signification signifies,
in which one is exposed without holding back to the other, in which the
one approaches the other, is not exhausted in invocation, in the salutation
that does not cost anything, understood as a pure vocative. The vocative
indicates a meaning, but does not suffice for the sense of proximity and
sincerity which signifies it. 

The glory of the Infinite is the anarchic
identity of the subject flushed out without being able to slip away. It is the
ego led to sincerity, making signs to the other, for whom and before whom
I am responsible, of this very giving of signs, that is, of this responsibility:

“here 1 am.” The saying prior to anything said bears witness to glory. This
witness is true, but with a truth irreducible to the truth of disclosure, and
does not narrate anything that shows itself. Saying is without noematic
correlation in the pure obedience to glory that orders. It is without dia­
logue, in the passivity from the first subordinate to the “here I am.” Th


145
extracts me from the concept
taking the birthchild from birth canal

 It extracts me from the concept in
which I continually take refuge, for I find in it the measure of an obligation
which is not defined in the election.

 The assignation is entry into me by burglary, that is, without
showing itself, speaking in the saying of the assigned one. I have always
been exposed to assignation in responsibility, as though put under a leaden
sun without protecting shadows, where every residue of mystery vanishes,
every mental reservation through which evasion would be possible

146
The subjectivity of
the subject, as being subject to everything, is a pre-originary susceptibility,
before all freedom and outside of every present. It is accused in uneasiness
or the unconditionality of the accusative, in the “here I am” (me void)
which is obedience to the glory of the Infinite that orders me to the other.11

147

reverting in which the exterior
inwardness

 noesis to a noema, a cause
to an effect, the memorable past to the present. This plot connects to what
detaches itself absolutely, to the Absolute. The detachment of the Infinite
from the thought that seeks to thematize it and the language that tries to
hold it in the said is what we have called illeity. One is tempted to call this
plot religious; it is not stated in terms of certainty or uncertainty, and does
not rest on any positive theology

 The saying from which this system
derives is not the babbling infancy of this system and of the circulation of
the information in which it functions. For one can show how this new
destiny is inscribed in the witness borne.14

what does the word "not" mean in Levinas?
not / knot

pas / pas
step not

The inscription of the order in the for-the-other
of obedience is an anarchic being affected, which slips into me “like a thief’
through the outstretched nets of consciousness. This trauma has surprised
me completely; the order has never been represented, for it has never been
presented, not even in the past coming in memory, to the point that it is I
that only says, and after the event, this unheard-of obligation. T

149
 The Infinite is not in front of its witness, but as it were outside, or
on the “other side” of presence, already past, out of reach, a thought
behind thoughts which is too lofty to push itself up front. “Here I am, in
the name of God,” without referring myself directly to his presence. “Here
I am,” just that! The word God is still absent from the phrase in which
God is for the first time involved in words. It does not at all state “1 believe
in God.” To bear witness God is precisely not to state this extraordi­
nary word, as though glory would be lodged in a theme and be posited as a
thesis, or become being’s essence. As a sign given to the other of this very
signification, the “here I am” signifies me in the name of God

150
 imperiously that proximity narrows. The
order has not been the cause of my response, nor even a question that
would have preceded it in a dialogue. I find the order in my response itself,
which, as a sign given to the neighbor, as a “here I am,” brings me out of
invisibility, out of the shadow in which my responsibility could have been
evaded. This saying belongs to the very glory of which it bears witness.
This way for the order to come from l know not where, this coming that is
not a recalling, is not the return of a present modified or aged into a past,
this non-phenomenality of the order which, beyond representation affects
me unbeknownst to myself, “slipping into me like a thief,”19 w

infinite invert
 It invests being in the very copula with which it receives
attributes. 

153

inversion, subversion
subjectivity subjected to everything

 The defection of identity is a for-the-other in the midst of
identity; it is the inversion of being into a sign, the subversion of essence
that begins to signify before being, the disinterestedness of essence.


“supporting the other,” “substituting oneself for him”?

 re-presentation,

 a subreption 

 reflection

  Here there is an inversion of order: the revelation is made by
him that receives it, by the inspired subject whose inspiration, alterity in
the same, is the subjectivity or psyche of the subject. 

 the apex of vocabulary,
admission of the stronger than me in me and of the “less than nothing,”
nothing but an abusive word, a beyond themes in a

157
 Why would proximity, the pure signification of saying, the anarchic
one-for-the-other of beyond being, revert to being or fall into being, into a
conjunction of entities, into essence showing itself in the said?

We then have to follow in signification or proximity or saying the latent
birth of cognition and essence, of the said, the latent birth of a question, in
responsibility

relationship
substitute

 there would be the latent birth of
representation, logos, consciousness, work, 


, it is thus born from the signifyingness of
signification, the-one-for-the-other, signification.

162-3
- an ego which, for Fichte is an origin
of itself. It is an absolute

 The rumbling of the there is is the non­
sense in which essence turns, and in which thus turns the justice issued out
of signification. There is ambiguity of sense and non-sense in being, sense
turning into non-sense. It cannot be taken lightly.

 It is in its
ex-ception and ex-pulsion as a responsible one that a subject outside of
being can be conceived. In signification, in the-one-for-the-other


164
m. The one in the-one-for-the-other is not a
being outside of being, but signification, evacuation of Being’s essence for
the other. The self is a substitution for the other, subjectivity as a subjec­
tion to everything, as a supporting everything and supporting the whole.
The incessant murmur of the there is strikes with absurdity the active
transcendental ego, beginning and present.

But one must not say
that the there is results from a “subjective impression.” In this overflowing
of sense by nonsense, the sensibility, the self, is first brought out, in its
bottomless passivity, as pure sensible point, a dis-interestedness, or subver­
sion of essence. Behind the anonymous rustling of the there is subjectivity


transcendental imperialism
There is deliverance into itself of an ego awakened from its imperialist
dream, its transcendental imperialism, awakened to itself, a patience as a
subjection to everything. In this spirituality infinity comes to pass, m

 In an alternating movement,
like that which leads from skepticism to the refutation that reduces it to
ashes, and from its ashes to its rebirth, philosophy justifies and criticizes
the laws of being and of the city, and finds again the signification that
consists in detaching from the absolute one-for-the-other both the one and
the other

166
 Plato, and had to lead him
to commit a parricide on his father Parmenides. Was it not guided by the
structure of the-one-for-the-other inscribed in human fraternity, in the one
keeper of his brother, the one responsible for the other, which would be
the-one-for-the-other par excellence? One can call it utopian, yet it is the
exact situation of men, at least in our time, when intellectuals feel them­
selves to be hostages for destitute masses unconscious of their wretched­
ness. Intellectuals are today mistrustful of a philosophy of the one keeper
of his brother, the-one-for-the-other set forth as significations par excel­
lence; they would scornfully call it humanist and even hagiographical. In
these significations is overturned the whole context in which we have de­
scribed the other intelligibility, intelligibility as a relation between terms
collected into a present and a presence, presented in a theme, the intelligi­
bility of the correlation between this relationship and the subject to which
it is present

The unity of the human race is in fact posterior to fraternity.

 between me
and a neighbor, turns into non-indifference, precisely into -my responsibil­
ity. Non-indifference, humanity, the-one-for-the-other is the very signi-
fyingness of signification, the intelligibility of the intelligible, and thus
reason. The non-indifference of responsibility to the point of substitution
for the neighbor is the source of all compassion.

167
 I am a hostage, for I am alone to
wage it, running a fine risk, dangerously. This danger will appear to know­
ing as an uncertainty, but it is transcendence itself, before certainty and
uncertainty, which arise only in knowledge. To require that a communica­
tion be sure of being heard is to confuse communication and knowledge, to
efface the difference, to fail to recognize the signifyingness of the-one-for-
the-other in me. I am extracted from the concept of the ego, and am not
measured by being and death, that is, escape the totality and structures. 

If the preoriginal reason of difference, non-indifference, responsibility, a
fine risk, conserves its signification, the couple skepticism and refutation o f
skepticism has to make its appearance alongside of the reason in represen­
tation, knowing, and deduction, served by logic and synchronizing the
successive.


Skepticism, which traverses the rationality or logic of knowledge,
is a refusal to synchronize the implicit affirmation contained in saying and
the negation which this affirmation states in the said. The contradiction is
visible to reflection, which refutes it, but skepticism is insensitive to the
168
refutation, as though the affirmation and negation did not resound in the
same time. Skepticism then contests the thesis that between the saying and
the said the relationship that connects in synchrony a condition with the
conditioned is repeated. It is as though skepticism were sensitive to the
difference between my exposure without reserve to the other, which is say­
ing, and the exposition or statement of the said in its equilibrium and
justice.

negation, not
not and skepticism
"not"


 Does not
the last word belong to philosophy? 

d puts an interval between saying and the said.
Skepticism is refutable, but it returns.

. Philosophy underestimates the extent of the nega­
tion in this “not appearing,” which exceeds the logical scope of negation
and affirmation. It 

 Western philosophy has not been the refutation of
skepticism as much as the refutation of transcendence. The logos said has
the last word dominating all meaning, the word of the end, the very possi­
bility of the ultimate and the result. Nothing can interrupt it. Every contes­
tation and interruption of this power of discourse is at once related and
invested by discourse. It thus recommences as soon as one interrupts it. In
the logos said, and written, it survives the death of the interlocutors that
state it, and assures the continuity of culture. But does it not die with the
end of civilizations, which recognize themselves to be mortal? The question
can be raised. But the philosophical discourse of the West knows how to
find again, under the ruins or in the hieroglyphs, the interrupted discourses
of every civilization and of the prehistory of civilizations that were set up
as separated. This discourse will affirm itself to be coherent and one. In
relating the interruption of the discourse or my being ravished into dis­
course 1 connect its thread. The discourse is ready to say all the ruptures in
itself, and consume them as silent origin or as eschatology. If the philosoph­
ical discourse is broken, withdraws from speech and murmurs, is
spoken, it nonetheless speaks of that, and speaks 

n. It thereby renews itself. New
meanings arise in its meaning, and their exegesis is an unfolding, or history
before all historiography. Thus the ladder-proof equivocation that lan­
guage weaves signifies. Is it then not an aberration or a distortion of being
which is thematized in it, a twisting of identity? An impossible simulta-
peousness of meaning, the non-assemblable but also inseparable one-for-
the-other, is an excluded middle signifying as an equivocation or an
enigma. And yet can not this very beyond become a notion, while undoing
itself? L

of systems or the logical definition of concepts. This possibility is laid bare
in the poetic said, and the interpretation it calls for ad infinitum. It is
shown in the prophetic said, scorning its conditions in a sort of levitation.
It is by the approach, the-one-for-the-other of saying, related by the said,
that the said remains an insurmountable equivocation, where meaning
refuses simultaneity, does not enter into being, does not compose a whole.
The approach, or saying, is a relationship with what is not understood in
the together, the out-of-the-series. A subversion of essence, it overflows the
theme it states, the “all together," the “everything included” of the said.
Language is already skepticism. Does not the coherent discourse, wholly
absorbed in the said, owe its coherence to the State, which, violently
excludes subversive discourse? Coherence thus dissimulates a transcen­
dence, a movement from the one to the other, a latent diachrony, uncer­
tainty and a fine risk.

 indeed become a pure said, a simultaneousness of the saying
and of its conditions. A book is interrupted discourse catching up with its
own breaks. But books have their fate; they belong to a world they do not
include, but recognize by being written and printed, and by being prefaced
and getting themselves preceded with forewords. They are interrupted, and
call for other books and in the end are interpreted in a saying distinct from
the said

 But that the contradic­
tion that opposes one to the other does not strangle 
returner 
Representation
 It recalls the breakup of the unity of
the transcendental apperception, without yhich one could not otherwise
than be


SINISTER GALLERY:  Mother
also mephistopheles the jew

MephistophelesWhat one possesses in it, would you now know?

The key will sniff the place out, from all others.

Follow it down: it leads you to the Mothers.

FaustThe Mothers! That always strikes me like a blow!6265
What is that word that, once heard, scares me so?

MephistophelesAre you so limited one new word disturbs you?

Will you only hear what you’re accustomed to?

Don’t be troubled, whatever strange sound rings,

You’ve already long been used to marvellous things.6270
FaustYes, there’s no good for me in lethargy.

A shudder’s the truest sign of humanity:

Though the world is such we may not feel it,

Once seized by it, we feel Immensity deeply.

MephistophelesThen, descend! I might as easily say rise!6275
It’s all the same. Escape from what exists,

Into the boundless realm where all Form lies!

Delight in what’s no longer on the list:

Where turmoil rolls along all cloudily:

Then, far from your body, swing the key!6280


s. Without this erosion of essence accomplished by its very
esse, nothing would ever have shown itself. For does not the object of
perception traverse an indefinite multiplicity of silhouettes to be identi­
fied with identity, distinct from any concrete similitude between
images? Science which is science of the universal, play of essence
playing at being and at nothingness, would never have been born. 


177
The true problem for us Westerners is not so much to refuse
violence as to question ourselves about a struggle against violence which,
without blanching in non-resistance to evil, could avoid the institution of
violence out of this very struggle. Does not the war perpetuate that which
it is called to make disappear, and consecrate war and its virile virtues in
good conscience? One has to reconsider the meaning of a certain human
weakness, and no longer see in patience only the reverse side of the onto­
logical finitude of the human. But for that one has to be patient oneself
without asking patience of the others - and for that one has to admit a
difference between oneself and the others. One has to find for man another
kinship than that which ties him to being, one that will perhaps enable us
to conceive of this difference between me and the other, this inequality, in
a sense absolutely opposed to oppression.
Such a reconsideration is hardly conceivable

there is as public generality.  also as nihilism
key to headgear
ven conceived outside of all National-Socialist contamina­
tions, is (despite “the death of God”) taken as blasphemy. But does the
subject escape the concept and essence, anxiety over death and horror of
the there is, only in resignation and illusion, against which at the hour of
truth or of the inevitable awakening essence is stronger? Can one not
understand the subjectivity of the subject beyond essence, a

178
is ignorance and openness, an indifference to essence, is desig­
nated in the title of this book by the barbarous expression “otherwise than
being”; it

 inwardness to being, the being at home with oneself,
of which European history itself has been the conquest and jealous defense.
And we would not here have ventured to recall the beyond essence if this
history of the West did not bear, in its margins, the trace of events carrying
another signification, and if the victims of the triumphs which entitle the
eras of history could be separate from its meaning. H


180
s. Freedom
is animation itself, breath, the breathing of outside air, where inwardness
frees itself from itself, and is exposed to all the winds. There is exposure
without assumption, which would already be closedness. That the empti­
ness of space would be filled with invisible air, hidden from perception,
save in the caress of the wind or the threat of storms, non-perceived but
penetrating me even in the retreats of my inwardness, that this invisibility
or this emptiness would be breathable or horrible, that this invisibility is
non-indifferent and obsesses me before all thematization, that the simple
ambiance is imposed as an atmosphere to which the subject gives himself
and exposes himself in his lungs, without intentions and aims, t

180-1
ere. There is
a passivity in the exposure, which does not succeed in taking form. My
exposure to another in my responsibility for him takes place without a
decision on my part; the least appearance of initiative and subjective act
signifies then a more profound emphasis of the passivity of this exposition.
It is exposure to the openness of a face, which is the “further still” of the
undergoing of the closure of the oneself, the opening up which is not
being-in-the-world. A further deep breathing even in the breath cut short
by the wind of alterity. The approach of the neighbor is a fission of the
subject beyond lungs, in the resistant nucleus of the ego, in the undivided­
ness of its individuality. It is a fission of self, or the self as fissibility, a
passivity more passive still than the passivity of matter. To open oneself as
space, to free oneself by breathing from closure in oneself already presup­
poses this beyond: my responsibility for the other and my aspiration by the
181
other, the crushing charge, the beyond, of alterity. That the breathing by
which entities seem to affirm themselves triumphantly in their vital space
would be a consummation, a coring out of my substantiality, that in breath­
ing I already open myself to my subjection to the whole of the invisible
other, that the beyond or the liberation would be the support of a crushing
charge, is to be sure surprising. It is this wonder that has been the object of
the book proposed here.


181-2
An openness of the self to the other, which is not a conditioning or a
foundation of oneself in some principle, a fixity of a sedentary inhabitant
or a nomad, but a relation wholly different from the occupation of a site, a
building, or a settling oneself, breathing is transcendence in the form of
opening up. It reveals all its meaning only in the relationship with the
other, in the proximity of a neighbor, which is responsibility for him, sub­
stitution for him. This pneumatism is not nonbeing; it is disinterestedness,
excluded middle of essence, besides being and non being.
But is not the diachrony of the inspiration and expiration separated by
the instant that belongs to an animality? Would animality be the openness
upon the beyond essence? But perhaps animality is only the soul’s still
being too short of breath. In human breathing, in its everyday equality,
perhaps we have to already hear the breathlessness of an inspiration that
paralyzes essence, that transpierces it with an inspiration by the other, an
inspiration that is already expiration, that “rends the soul”!1 It is the lon­
gest breath there is, spirit. Is man not the living being capable of the longest
breath in inspiration, without a stopping point, and in expiration, without
return? To transcend oneself, to leave one’s home to the point of leaving
oneself, is to substitute oneself for another. It is. in my bearing of myself,
not to conduct myself well, but by my unicity as a unique being to expiate
for the other. The openness of

 it is because
newness comes from the other that there is in newness transcendence and
signification.

 Are not the solemnity of
ceremonies and cults which can transport, the newness of the instants of
duration, incomparable springtimes, outside of everyday time, 

superlative

 It is on the contrary in the hyperbole, the superlative, the excel­
lence of signification from which they derive, the transcendency that passes
in them or surpasses itself in them, and which is not a mode of being
showing itself in a theme, that notions and the essence they articulate
break up and get woven into a human plot. The emphasis of exteriority is
excellency. Height is heaven. The kingdom of heaven is ethical. Thi


184
, despite all of Heidegger’s artti-
intellectualism, the gnoseological correlation: man called forth by a
manifestation, is found again. Here the human is brought out by tran­
scendence, or the hyperbole, that is, the disinterestedness of essence, a hy­
perbole in which it breaks up and falls upward, into the human. O

185
But each individual of these peoples is virtually a chosen one, called to
leave in his turn, or without awaiting his turn, the concept of the ego, its
extension in the people, to respond with responsibility: me, that is, here /
am fo r the others, to lose his place radically, or his shelter in being, to
enter into ubiquity which is also a utopia. Here I am for the others - an
enormous response, whose inordinateness is attenuated with hypocrisy as
soon as it enters my ears forewarned of being’s essence, that is, the way
being carries on. T


terms like il y a fade into the text
historicity of the language written by self as an other - levinas(1977) vs levinas (1981)

But logic interrupted
by the structures of what is b e y o n d b e in g which show themselves in it does not confer a
dialectical structure to philosophical propositions. It is the superlative, more than the ne­
gation of categories, which interrupts systems, as though the logical order and the being it
succeeds in espousing retained the superlative which exceeds them m. In subjectivity the
superlative is the exorbitance of a null-site, in caresses and in sexuality the “excess" of
tangency-as though tangency admitted a gradation - up to contact with the entrails, a
skin going under another skin.


 M. Derrida has felicitously and
boldly translated this term by “vouloir dire” (meaning to say)

.
 These lines, and those that follow, owe much to Heidegger. Deformed and ill-understood?
Perhaps. At least this deformation will not have been a way to deny the debt. Nor this
debt a reason to forget. ..

. Contrary to what is maintained in C r e a tiv e E v o lu tio n , all disorder is not another order.
The anarchy o f the diachronic is not “assembled” into an order, except in the said. Berg­
son, distrustful as he is of language, is here a victim of the said.
7. Still here too, bread does not belong to the transcendence of the noematic, appearing in
the said, offering as a spectacle the infinite peelings of the image. Bread already refers
to the incarnate subject who has earned it in the sweat of his brow.



bastard
 One forgets the extraordinary possi­
bility of a skeptical statement, returning as a bastard child of the Spirit after each of the
refutations that drive it from the paternal house, contesting truth in a statement alleged to
be true, a thought that is one, but at the same time not a thought.
e relaxation in intoxication is a sem­
blance of distance and irresponsibility. It is a suppression of fraternity, or a murder of the
brother. The possibility of going off measures the distance between dream and wakeful­
ness. Dream and illusion are the play of a consciousness come out of obsession, tou

 an ambiguity in which the contact of proximity takes on a doxic
meaning: contact becomes palpation, groping, exploration, search, knowing of a nudity
such as that which a doctor examines, or an athlete exhibits in health. Th

. Certain developments have been formulated in a more
severe manner for the reader, who can go further than the listener.

. It would be self-contra­
dictory to set it up as a principle (in the sense that anarchists understand it). Anarchy
cannot be sovereign, like an a re h e . It can only disturb the State - but in a radical way,
making possible moments of negation w ith o u t a n y affirmation. The State then cannot set
itself up as a Whole. But, on the other hand, anarchy can be stated. Yet disorder has an
irreducible meaning, as refusal of synthesis. Cf. p. 191, note 6.
4.
 Yet this is an inability which is s a id . Anarchy does not re ig n . and thus remains in ambi­
guity, in enigma, and leaves a trace which speech, in the pain of expression, seeks to state.
But there is only a trace.

The measure of a determi­
nation would thus be the evil measurement of a Nessus tunic. But anxiety as being-for-
death is also the hope to reach the deep of non-being. The possibility of deliverance (and
the temptation to suicide) arises in death anxiety: like nothingness, death is an openness
into which, along with a being, the anxiety over its definition is engulfed. But, on the
other hand, anxiety as the tightness of the “going forth into fullness,” is the recurrence of
the oneself, but without evasion, without shirking, that is, a responsibility stronger than
death - which Plato in the P h a e d o , affirms in his own way, in condemning suicide (6

 The body is neither an obstacle opposed to the soul, nor a tomb that imprisons it, but
that by which the self is susceptibility itself. Incarnation is an extreme passivity; to be ex­
posed to sickness, suffering, death, is to be exposed to compassion, and, as a self, to the
gift that costs. The oneself is on this side of the zero of inertia and nothingness, in deficit
of being, in itself and not in being, without a place to lay its head, in the no-grounds, and
thus without conditions. As such it will be shown to be the bearer of the world, bearing
it, suffering it, blocking rest and lacking a fatherland. It is the correlate of a persecution,
a substitution for the other.

 Lamentations, 3, 30.
15.
 In Otrepiev’s dream, thrice repeated, in Pushkin’s B o ris G o d u n o v , the false Dmitri
catches sight of his future sovereignty in the equivocal laughter of the people: “ . .. from
above Moscow appeared to me like an anthill, below the people were boiling and pointed
to me and laughed. I was overcome with shame and fear and in throwing myself down
head first, I awoke.” Laughter at the bottom of the gesture that points me out, shame and
fear of the ego, the “accusative” where everything designates me and assigns me, awaken­
ing in a headlong fall-all this is the unconditionality of the subject behind its
sovereignty.

the illeity of infinity in the face as the trace of the withdrawal which
the infinite qua infinite effects before coming, and which addresses the other to my re­
sponsibility - remain descriptions of the non-thematizable, the anarchical, and, con­
sequently, do not lead to any theological thesis. Language can nonetheless speak of
it, if only by an abuse of language, and it thus confirms the fact that it is impossible
for the anarchical to be constitued as a sovereignty - which implies the unconditionality
of anarchy. But the hold of language on the anarchical is not a mastery, for otherwise
anarchy would be subordinate to the a r c h i of consciousness. This hold is the struggle and
pain of expression. Whence comes discourse and the necessity of the a rc h e of sovereignty
and of the State; we shall speak of that further (Chapter V, pp. 156fi). It is clear also
that in our way of interpreting signifyingness, the practical order (and the religious which
is inseparable from the practical) is defined by the anarchical. Theology would be possible
only as the contestation of the purely religious, and confirms it only by its failures or its
struggles.
20. One could be tempted to take substitution to be the being

 Language thus
shows itself to be something quite different from a doubling up of thoughts. T

 Thus theological language destroys the religious situation of transcendence. The infinite
“presents” itself anarchically, but thematization loses the anarchy which alone can accred­
it it. Language about God rings false or becomes a myth, that is, can never be taken
literally.

The terms are not of the same order, but only the
ethical qualification here distinguishes the equivalents. But values are valid before
freedom: responsibility precedes it. Persecution is a trauma, violence par excellence
without warning nor a priori, without possible apology, without logos. Persecution leads
back to a resignation not consented to, and consequently crosses a night of
unconsciousness. That is the sense of the unconscious

Perhaps the notion of anarchy accounts for the notion of worth, whose dimension is so diffi­
cult to distinguish from the being of entities. To be worth is to “weigh" on the subject, but
otherwise than the way a cause weighs on an effect, a being on the thought to which it
presents itself, an end on the tendency or the will it solicits. What does this “otherwise”
mean? We think that to worth there arises a susceptibility incapable of thematizingit, that is,
a susceptibility which cannot assume what it receives, but which, in spite of itself, becomes
responsible for it. Value in its original radiation renders “pure” or “impure” before any inten­
tional movement, without there being a free attitude toward value that could be taken up.
The death of the other makes me impure through its proximity, and explains the “Noli me
tangere." That is not a phenomenon of the mystical mentality, but an ineffaceable moment
which the notion of value brings us back to.
29. Cf. “Enigme et phenomene” in 


 Thus there is need to unsay
all that comes to alter the nakedness of signs, to set aside all that is said in the pure saying
proper to proximity. One cannot unambiguously make signs in the night. O

 According to the myth of the G o rg ia s (523 c-d), 

 The sages of Israel say, as a parable, that Moses gave up his soul in the kiss of God. To
die on the order of God is expressed in Hebrew as dying “on the mouth of God" (Deut.,
34:5). The absolute expiration, in the kiss of God, is death on order, in passivity and obe­
dience, in the inspiration by the other for the other.
