The maternal in Sarah Ruddick
Specific relations to each other
A specificity enrooted in the biological conditions of life and frutition

Mutual aid as mutual care
This is what is interesting about Kropotkin
Considering what are the conditions of life 
That life is a type of struggle, of a war of all against all
Does life simply go along the way of struggle of species for domination
This is a Darwinian aspect but is most pronounced in Spencer 
and is now ridiculous parody of it in fascist literature as might makes right
but also in the to find your peole of the Invisible COmmittee

Autarchy and anarchy
that you are looking only after yourself
The fantasy of MacBeth, that the world would disappear as soon as one does
But the world exists beyond one's own life and one exists within a metabolic relationship with it.
One's self and oens' production decompose into the material of the world, which gives the plants to the rest of the things to bloom init

The people are constituted by this dependence
One would like to imagine the sphere of desiring production as simply a continous dizzying excess
but needs are more mundane, keep us rooted in the world in different relations of production 

 in order to cross the Amur where it is
narrowest - in all these scenes of animal life which passed before my eyes, I saw
Mutual Aid and Mutual Support carried on to an extent which made me suspect in
it a feature of the greatest importance for the maintenance of life, the preservation
of each species, and its further evolution.

a Russian Congress of Naturalists, in January 1880, by the well-known zoologist,
Professor Kessler, the then-Dean of the St. Petersburg University, struck me as
throwing a new light on the whole subject. Kessler's idea was, that besides THE LAW
OF MUTUAL STRUGGLE there is in Nature THE LAW OF MUTUAL AID, which, for the
success of the struggle for life, and especially for the progressive evolution of the
species, is far more important than the law of mutual contest. 

 It will be only after we have
well-established the facts of mutual aid in different classes of animals, and their
importance for evolution, that we shall be able to study what belongs in the
evolution of sociable feelings, to parental feelings, and what to sociability proper -
the latter having evidently its origin at the earliest stages of the evolution of the
animal world, perhaps even at the "colony-stages." 

 However, to reduce animal sociability to LOVE and
SYMPATHY means to reduce its generality and its importance, just as human ethics
based upon love and personal sympathy only have contributed to narrow the
comprehension of the moral feeling as a whole. It is not love to my neighbour -
whom I often do not know at all - which induces me to seize a pail of water and to
rush towards his house when I see it on fire; it is a far wider, even though more
vague feeling or instinct of human solidarity and sociability which moves me


 It is the conscience - be it only at the stage of
an instinct - of human solidarity. It is the unconscious recognition of the force that
is borrowed by each person from the practice of mutual aid; of the close
dependency of every one's happiness upon the happiness of all; and of the sense of
4
justice, or equity, which brings the individua l to consider the rights of every other
individual as equal to his own.

 It was necessary to
indicate the overwhelming importance which sociable habits play in Nature and in
the progressive evolution of both the animal species and human beings: to prove
that they secure to animals a better protection from their enemies, very often
facilities for getting food and (winter provisions, migrations, etc.), lo

Both are constructed chiefly on the lines taken in Btichner's LOVE,
and in the second work the parental and familial feeling as the sole influence at
work in the development of the moral feelings has been dealt with at some length.

But he foresaw that the term which he
was introducing into science would lose its philosophical and its only true meaning
if it were to be used in its narrow sense only - that of a struggle between separate
individuals for the sheer means of existence. 

He pointed out how, in numberless animal societies, the struggle between separate
individuals for the means of existence disappears, how STRUGGLE is replaced by CO-
OPERATION, and how that substitution results in the development of inte llectu al
and moral faculties which secure to the species the best conditions for survival. He
intimated that in such cases the fittest are not the physically strongest, nor the
cunningest, but those who learn to combine so as mutually to support each other,
9
strong and weak alike, for the welfare of the community. 

 Nay, on the very pages just
mentioned, amidst data disproving the narrow Malthusian conception of struggle,
the old Malthusian leaven reappeared - namely, in Darwin's remarks as to the
alleged inconveniences of maintaining the "weak in mind and body" in our
civilized societies (ch. v). As if thousands of weak -bodied and infirm poets,
scientists, inventors, and reformers, together with other thousands of so-called
"fools" and "weak -minded enthusiasts," were not the most precious weapons used
by humanity in its struggle for existence by intellectual and moral arms, which
Darwin himself emphasized in those same chapters of DESCENT OF MAN.

 And while Herbert Spencer, starting on
independent but closely allied lines, attempted to widen the inquiry into that great
question, "Who are the fittest?" especially in the appendix to the third edition of the
DATA OF ETHICS, the numberless followers of Darwin reduced the notion of struggle
for existence to its narrowest limits. They came to conceive the animal world as a
world of perpetual struggle among half-starved individuals, thirsting for one
another's blood. They made modern literature resound with the war -cry of WOE TO
THE VANQUISHED, as if it were the last word of modern biology. They raised the
"pitiless" struggle for personal advantages to the height of a biological principle
which humans must submit to as well, under the menace of otherwise succumbing
in a world based upon mutual extermination. 

we at once see that those animals which acquire
11
habits of mutual aid are undoubtedly the fittest. 

"I obviousl y do not deny the struggle for existence, but I maintain that the
progressive development of the animal kingdom, and especially of mankind, is
favoured much more by mutual support than by mutual struggle ..

 we witnessed numbers of facts of mutual support,
especially during the migrations of birds and ruminants; 

we already might safely conclude that mutual aid (which leads to
mutual confidence, the first condition for courage) and individual initiative (the
first condition for intellectual progress) are two factors infinitely more important
than mutual struggle in the evolution of the animal kingdom. 


I need not dwell upon the associations of male and female for rearing their
offspring, for providing it with food during their first steps in life, or for hunting in
common; though it may be mentioned by the way that such associations are the
18
rule even with the least sociable carnivores and rapacious birds; and that they
derive a special interest from being the field upon which tenderer feelings develop
even amidst otherwise most cruel animals. I

conatus essendi

 But, all things considered, it must be said that sociability,
action in common, mutual protection, and a high development of those feelings
which are the necessary outcome of social life, are characteristic of most monkeys
and apes. F


 Sociability - that is, the need of the animal of associating with its like - the
love of society for society's sake, combined with the "joy of life," only now begins
to receive due attention from the zoologists. 50 We know at the present time that all
animals, beginning with the ants, going on to the birds, and ending with the highest
mammals, are fond of plays, wrestling, running after each other, trying to capture
each other, teasing each other, and so on. And while many plays are, so to speak, a
school for the proper behaviour of the young in mature life, there are others, which,
apart from their utilitarian purposes, are, together with dancing and singing, mere
manifestations of an excess of forces - "the joy of life," and a desire to
communicate in some way or another with other individuals of the same or of other
species - in short, a manifestation of SOCIABILITY PROPER, which is a distinctive
feature of all the animal world . 51 Whether the feeling be fear, experienced at the
appearance of a bird of prey, or "a fit of gladness" which bursts out when the
animals are in good health and especially when young, or merely the desire of
giving play to an excess of impressions and of vital power - the necessity of
communicating impressions, of playing, of chattering, or of simply feeling the
proximity of other kindred living beings pervades Nature, and is, as much as any
other physiological function, a distinctive feature of life and impressionability. This
need takes a higher development and attains a more beautiful expression in
mammals, especially amidst their young, and still more among the birds; but it
pervades all Nature, and has been fully observed by the best naturalists, 

The high development of parental love in all
classes of animals, even with lions and tigers, is generally known. As to the young
birds and mammals whom we continually see associating, sympathy - not love -
attains a further development in their associations. 

"Don't compete! - competition is always injurious to the species, and you
have plenty of resources to avoid it!" That is the TENDENCY of nature, not always
realized in full, but always present. That is the watchword which comes to us from
the bush, the forest, the river, the ocean. "Therefore combine - practise mutual aid!
That is the surest means for giving to each and to all the greatest safety, the best
guarantee of existence and progress, bodily, intellectual, and moral."

Hobbes took that position; and while some of his eighteenth -century followers
endeavoured to prove that at no epoch of its existence - not even in its most
primitive condition - mankind lived in a state of perpetual warfare; that humans
have been sociable even in "the state of nature," 

It has been remarked more than once that the chief error of Hobbes, and the
eighteenth-century philosophers as well, was to imagine that mankind began its life
in the shape of small straggling families, something like the "limited and
temporar y" families of the bigger carnivores, while in reality it is now positively
known that such was NOT the case . O

The very persistence of the clan
organization shows how utterly false it is to represent primitive mankind as a
disorderly agglomeration of individuals, who only obey their individual passions,
and take advantage of their personal force and cunningness against all other
representatives of the species. Unbridled individualism is a modern growth, but it
is not characteristic of primitive mankind . 

The feeling of friendship is known among them; it is strong. Weak people are
usually supported; sick people are very well attended to; they never are abandoned
or killed. These tribes are cannibals, but they very seldom eat members of their own
tribe (when immolated on religious principles, I suppose); they eat strangers only.

. During a protracted scarcity of food, the Aleoute
cares first for his children; he gives them all he has, and himself fasts.

However, at no period of man's life were wars the NORMAL state of existence. While
warriors exterminated each other, and the priests celebrated their massacres, the
masses continued to live their daily life, they prosecuted their daily toil. And it is
one of the most interesting studies to follow that life of the masses; to study the
means by which they maintained their own social organization, which was based
upon their own conceptions of equity, mutual aid, and mutual support - of
common law, in a word, even when they were submitted to the most ferocious
theocracy or autocracy in the State.

 He also is
subject to the great principle of Mutual Aid which grants the best chances of
survival to those who best support each other in the struggle for life. These were
the conclusions arrived at in the previous chapters.


 every kind of
individual suffering; but they hardly bear any trace of the countless acts of mutual
support and devotion which every one of us knows from his own experience; they
hardly take notice of what makes the very essence of our daily life - our social
instincts and manners. No wo

The village
community was not only a union for guaranteeing to each one his fair. share in the
common land, but also a union for common culture, for mutual support in all
possibl e forms, for protection from violence, and for a further development of
knowledge, national bonds, and moral conceptions; and every change in the
judicial, military, educational, or economical manners had to be decided at the
folkmotes of the village, the tribe, or the confederation. The community being a
continuation of the gens, it inherited all its functions . It was the UNIVERSITAS, the
MIR - a world in itself.


 But it is a habit with the
Buryates, especially those of Kudinsk - and habit is more than law - that if a
family has lost its cattle, the richer families give it some cows and horses that it may
recover. As to the destitute man who has no family, he takes his meals in the huts of
his congeners; he enters a hut, takes - by right, not for charity - his seat by the
fire, and shares the meal which always is scrupulously divided into equal parts; he
sleeps where he has taken his evening meal.

end page 89