. The goal of this book will be to explain the early origins of
the mutual understanding, giving impulses, mind reading, and other hy-
persocial tendencies that make this possible.

. A growing body of research is persuading neuroscientists that
Baruch Spinoza’s seventeenth-­century proposal better captures the full
range of tensions humans grow up with. “The endeavor to live in a shared,
peaceful agreement with others is an extension of the endeavor to pre-
serve oneself.” Emerging evidence is drawing psychologists and econo-
mists alike to conclude that “our brains are wired to cooperate with oth-
ers” as well as to reward or punish others for mutual cooperation.11


Only among humans do we find large-­scale cooperative
endeavors involving people who are not necessarily close kin. O

The researchers calculated that once ev­ery 17 years, caloric
defi­cits for nonsharers would fall below 50 percent of what was needed
21 days in a row, a recipe for starvation. By pooling their risk, the pro-
portion of days people suffered from such caloric shortfalls fell from 27
percent to only 3 percent.34


Far from being competitors for re-
sources, nearby members of their own species would have been more
valuable as potential sharing partners. When con­flicts did loom, moving
on would have been more practical as well as less risky than fight­ing.50
Nevertheless, from the early days of evolutionary anthropology 


Nevertheless, from the early days of evolutionary anthropology to
today’s textbooks in evolutionary psychology, the tendency has been to
devote more space to aggression and our “killer instincts” or to empha-
size “demonic” chimpanzeelike tendencies for males to join with other
males in their group to hunt neighboring groups and intimidate, beat,
torture, and kill them.51 No doubt our Pleistocene ancestors experienced
jealousy, competed for reputation, and harbored grudges or desires for
retribution that occasionally escalated into mayhem. Homicides among
hunter-­gatherers are well documented, often crimes of passion involv-
ing ­women. But such killings tend to involve individuals who know each
other rather than warfare between adjacent groups. In

pared with other apes.
Yet textbooks in fields like evolutionary psychology devote far more
space to aggression, or to how men and ­women competed for or appealed
to mates, than they do to how much early humans shared with one
­ another to jointly rear offspring.55 Even when human hypersociality is
noted, explanations tend to emphasize between-­group competition
rather than how dif­fi­cult it was to ensure the survival to breeding age of
costly, slow-­maturing children. Yet as this book will make clear, without
shared care and provisioning, all that inter-­ and intragroup strategizing
and strife would have been—evolutionarily speaking—just so many
grunts and contortions sig­nifying nothing.

 Custom, language, and personal experiences shape the
­spe­cifics, but the urge to share is hard-­wired, and neurophysiologists
are getting to the point where they can ac­tually monitor, if still only
crudely, the plea­sure humans derive from being generous, helping, and
sharing

? How could natural selection ever have favored the
peculiarly empathic qualities that over the course of human evolution
have served our species of emotionally modern humans so well?

Mothers and Others is about the emergence of a particular mode of child­
rearing known as “cooperative breeding” and its psychological impli­
cations for apes in the line leading to Homo sapiens. A

here emerged
in Africa a line of apes that began to be interested in the mental and sub-
jective lives—the thoughts and feelings—of others, interested in under-
standing them. These apes were markedly different from the common
ancestors they shared with chimpanzees, and in this respect they were
already emotionally modern.

Compared with other primates, humans are born far more eager to share
the mental and affective states of others.
So far as most psychiatrists are concerned, caring about someone
else’s mental as well as their physical state (whethe

Natural selection favored babies who
were sensitive to their mother’s body warmth and smells, able to squirm
close to her and latch onto her teats, and capable of signaling effectively
(and safely) when separated. It is no accident that the first regions of the
neocortex to form in utero are those that eventually represent and con-
trol sucking actions by the mouth and tongue. Once a baby is born, wrig-
gles close to his mother, and locates a nipple, he e will need to wrap his lips
around it, latch tight, and suck so as to stay fed and, just as importantly,
to further stimulate his mother’s nurturing impulses. The tugging at her
nipples stimulates the production of prolactin along with a surge of the
neuropeptide oxytocin, with its pleasurable and soothing effects.

mind reading hypothesis -- the machavellian intelligence hupothesis 

Higher primates possess a general social intelligence that equips
them to differentiate probable kin from nonkin, assess the strengths and
weaknesses of different individuals, keep track of past social interac-
tions in order to predict who is currently dominant to whom or who is
likely to reciprocate and who will not.36 To cope with social complexity,
monkeys and apes alike have to be w

All this
started to change around the beginning of the twenty-­first century, when
revolutionary discoveries about what other apes are ac­tually capable of
forced reconsideration of the question of why humans are so much more
inclined than other apes toward intersubjective engagement


visage 
s. Eyes, long celebrated by poets as
“windows” into the human soul, played a big role in such assumptions.
But what is distinctive about human eyes that allows this unique depth
of insight?

 Like many animals, Old
World monkeys and apes find it unnerving to be stared at (though, curi-
ously, this is not true for New World monkeys 

But meanings conveyed by long looks can also be quite variable. Human
eyes convey extra information about what an individual is feeling, look-
ing at, and intending. True, other apes also focus, squint, and blink, and
their eyes register patterns involving light and color the same way hu-
man eyes do. Other primates like baboons call attention to their eyes by
lowering pale lids and “flashing” their brows upward in arches of great
sig­nifi­cance much like humans do. But humans communicate with their
eyes more; many humans emphasize the direction of their gaze with a
conspicuous white surround highlighting exactly where the pupils are
pointed.56

 The chimpanzee babies most prone to extended
eye-­to-­eye contact with humans were the ones who had been separated
from their mothers and were especially eager to reestablish any kind of
contact.

 What happened, then, in the line
leading to the genus Homo to favor evolution of these traits? In this chap-
ter and the next I hypothesize that novel rearing conditions among a line
of early hominins meant that youngsters grew up depending on a wider
range of caretakers than just their mothers, and this de­pen­dence pro-
duced selection pressures that favored individuals who were better at de-
coding the mental states of others, and figuring out who would help and
who would hurt.
It is often as

 Long before our ancestors
evolved into big-­brained, anatomically modern humans, early hominins
were being reared by alloparents as well as parents. Once outed, this
long-­hidden secret in our family closet requires us to consider exactly
what roles these hitherto unacknowledged benefactors played.

Of all the attachments mammalian babies form, none is more pow-
erful than that between baby primates and their mothers.3 The emo-
tional ties that bind ape mothers to their infants and infants to their
mothers are unusually long-­lasting. Under natural conditions, an orang-
utan, chimpanzee, or gorilla baby nurses for four to seven years and at
the outset is inseparable from his mother, remaining in intimate front-­
to-­front contact 100 percent of the day and night. The earliest a wild
chimpanzee mother has ever been observed to voluntarily let a baby out
of her grasp is three and a half months.4

But whereas the nonhuman
ape mother undiscriminatingly accepts any infant born to her without
taking into account physical at­tri­butes, the human mother’s devotion is
more conditional. A newborn perceived as defective may be drowned,
buried alive, or simply wrapped in leaves and left in the bush within
hours of birth.13 “Defective” may mean anything from having too many
toes to too few. It may mean being born with a deformed limb or at a
very low birthweight, coming too soon after the birth of an older sibling,

Once a baby has nursed at his mother’s breast and lactation is under
way, a woman’s hormonal and neurological responses to this stimula-
tion, combined with visual, auditory, tactile, and olfactory cues, produce
a powerful emotional attachment to her baby

Human babies resemble other ape babies in their powerful desire to be
held close, and as with all apes, nothing suits them better than warm and
continuous contact with a responsive mother. But humans enter the
world on vastly different terms. They are born to a hairless mother whose
commitment to her infant is contingent on far more than her own prior
experience or physical condition. Her commitment depends as well on
her assessment of her baby’s particular at­tri­butes and on how much so-
cial support she anticipates receiving.18 Near-­term ­women are just as
restless and alert to conceivable sources of harm to their baby as other
apes would be. They are just as vigilant right before and right after birth,
and prone to postpartum anxiety. Even in a modern context, with their
infant sleeping soundly in a crib inside a walled, well-­heated nursery, new
mothers compulsively check again and again to be sure that their baby is
still breathing, still safe, still comfortable. I vividly recall my own sponta-
neous fantasies after bringing a new baby home from the hospital, imag-
ining the most implausible dangers. Years later I was astonished to learn
from Yale psychiatrist James Leckman that such anxious, obsessively
compulsive fantasies are typical of most new mothers.19

The mother is the principal caretaker . . . Suckling is frequent, and often,
but by no means always ‘on demand.’” As with other apes, the baby is in
continuous contact with someone, frequently the mother, but is also
held by grandmothers, great-­aunts, older siblings, fathers, and even visi-
tors from neighboring groups.

Efe babies average 14 different caretakers in the first days of life.38 Male
care­givers are usually fathers, brothers, or cousins, less often grandfa-
thers or uncles. F

From an early age, food
sharing be­comes a highlight of relations with allomothers—the amuse
bouche to the de­cades of alloparental provisioning to follow.

An Efe infant is born into an ever-expanding social world, passed between mother
and allomother, and among allomothers, in the days just after birth. (Steve Winn/
AnthroPhoto)


LEVINAS FEEDING mileu as edible

 In other cooperatively breeding mammals like wild dogs,
wolves, or meerkats, not only do alloparents of both sexes routinely bring
back food to the den but lactating mothers also suckle another female’s
young. Yet no other immatures depend on others to provision them for
years the way that human children do.
Among chimpanzees, who also grow up slowly, infants are provi-
sioned insofar as they are permitted to grab food from their mothers. A
youngster as old as two years has been observed to push pouted lips into
his mother’s face until she delivers a lipfull of shared food right into his
mouth.42 But only among humans is maternal and alloparental generos-
ity initiated from the first months and then sustained for years. Premas-
ticated mouthfuls of baby food are followed by finger foods, which are
followed by nuts and cooked roots, collected and often laboriously pro­
cessed by grandmothers and great-­aunts—and most delectably of all,
honey or meat brought in by the father, the child’s uncle, or other hunt-
80
 MOTHERS AND OTHERS
(Top) This eight-year-old Yanomamo allomother hugs and gently rocks a three-
month-old baby, as she kisses him on the mouth, transferring sweet saliva.
(Bottom) This Himba grandmother delivers food in mouth-to-mouth transfer, only
to have the baby playfully return the favor. Early ethologist Eibl-Eibesfeldt referred
to such behaviors as “kiss-feeding” after similar behaviors seen in birds and some
other primates. (I. Eibl-Eibesfeldt/Human Ethology Archives)
ers. Everyone receives a share of the highly prized meat. I agree with Dan-
iel Stern’s remark that “we grow up in a soup of other people’s feelings
and desires,” but I doubt that Dr. Stern intended for his metaphor about
edible milieus to apply quite so literally.

 It summarizes hun-
dreds of studies, most of them from Western so­ci­e­ties, elucidating how
and why a baby’s felt need for a “warm, intimate, and continuous” rela-
tionship turns out to be as addictive as opium. I

To correct the record, join me on a brief tour of how mothers among
this overlooked half of the primate order deal with infants in the period
after birth. Three points will emerge. First, there is no one, universal pattern
of infant care among primates. Second, far from being a hardwired primate-
wide trait, continuous-­care-­and-­contact mothering is a last resort for primate
mothers who lack safe and available alternatives. Third, and perhaps most im-
portant so far as primates are concerned, there is nothing evolutionarily out
of the ordinary about mothers cutting corners or relying on shared care.

When the mother goes off to forage, one
of these allomothers stays behind, and if the babies get hungry before
their mother returns, a lactating co-­mother may suckle them.51 G

allomother ally, allegeiance, tied together

ike Stephanie Coontz, along with anthropolo-
gists, psychologists, and social workers, have long been aware that, across
time and in diverse locales, infants born into poverty, at low birthweight
or premature, or to a teenage or unmarried mother tend to do better
cognitively, emotionally, and physically if they grow up in extended fam-
ilies. Whether alloparental interventions involve older siblings, grand-
mothers, or other kin, or just a particularly interested mentor, a vast
cross-­disciplinary literature attests to the fact that mothers with more
social support are more responsive to their infants’ needs. The greater
the risk factors, the more evident do correlations between alloparental
support, maternal sensitivity, and child well-­being become. As Coontz
puts it, “Children do best in so­ci­e­ties where childrearing is considered
too important to be left entirely to parents

t, Mark Flinn, found a
			
 W HY I T T A K ES A VILLAGE
 105
similar correlation between alloparental assistance and maternal repro-
ductive success among Ca­rib­be­an villagers in Trinidad. Mothers with
nonreproductive helpers on hand had higher reproductive success
than those without. 105 Daughters proved the most helpful, but hav-
ing any helper in the household, male or female, was still correlated with
increased child survival. Shortly afterward, Kristen Hawkes noticed
something odd about grandmothers among the Hadza people she was
studying. Her discovery would provide the catalyst for her fellow anthro-
pologists to begin to think in new ways about the evolutionary sig­nifi­
cance of ­women past childbearing age.

grandmother, crone, old woman
Hawkes and her colleagues also noticed something else. The first
gatherers to leave camp in the morning and the last to return in the eve-
ning, as well as those who ended up carrying the heavi­est loads, were not
(as one might expect) young ­women in their prime. Nor were they the
mothers with hungry children waiting back at camp. Rather, the most
dedicated food-­gatherers were the leathery-­faced old ­women, long past
their prime. In a landmark paper titled “Hardworking Hadza Grand-
106
 MOTHERS AND OTHERS
mothers,” the researchers described great-­aunts and grandmothers who,
far from taking advantage of their no-­longer-­child-­burdened “golden
years” to put their feet up, were working harder than ever.106
For children in these foraging groups, having a grandmother or
great-­aunt helping to feed them was correlated with faster growth
rates.107 In times of food shortage, it was also correlated with a higher
likelihood of survival.108 Turke’s reports from Ifaluk atoll, Flinn’s from
Trinidad, and now these find­ings from hunter-­gatherers in Tanzania all
pointed to intriguing parallels among cooperative breeders. Whether
older sisters, grandmothers, or great-­aunts, in ev­ery study it was allopar-
ents willing to help who permitted mothers to produce more children
likely to survive. Impressed by these discoveries, I became convinced that
humans, like many birds and mammals, must have evolved as coopera-
tive breeders, and by 1999 I was saying so. 109 Since then, the case for co-
operative breeding has only grown stron­ger, as researchers collected and
analyzed data from larger populations, including horticultural as well as
foraging so­ci­e­ties. These bigger sample sizes quickly began to yield highly
sig­nifi­cant results.

The results from their reanalysis of the Gambian data were stun-
ning. If the child had older siblings (especially sisters) or if the child’s
maternal grandmother was living nearby and was herself past reproduc-
tive age, the child’s probability of dying before age five fell from 40 per-
cent to 20 percent.112 Not surprisingly, mothers were critical for survival
during the first two years of life while the baby was still de­pen­dent on
breast milk. After age two, however, by which time Mandinka children
are usually weaned, the presence of a mother no ­longer had any measur-
able effect on child growth or survival. Apparently, compensatory care by
allomothers was suf­fi­ciently good that the physical condition of wean-
lings was unaffected by the death of their mothers. Thus Mandinka re-
ferred to anyone plump as being “fat as an orphan.”113

“There is no such thing as a baby,” the child psychia-
trist David Winnicott liked to say. “There is a baby and someone.” The
someone he had in mind was the mothe

You are cared for and will continue to be. Love (and that is a
perfectly good word for what we are talking about here) is a message ba-
bies are all too eager to receive, and small wonder. How secure an infant
feels depends on how responsive the mother is to his physical and emo-
tional needs. W

The paradigm shift away from think-
ing of our Pleistocene ancestors as reared by all-nurturing chimpanzee-
like mothers, and toward thinking of them as apes with species-typical
shared care, has been slow in coming. Only in the past de­cade have coop-
erative breeding’s implications for attachment theory begun to be ad-
dressed, and its evolutionary implications taken into account.


Le Visage
All primates are born innately predisposed to seek tactile contact
with somebody or, in the worst-case scenario (think of Harry Harlow’s
terrycloth-covered wire “surrogate” mothers), to something. But human
infants seem to require more than the warm, soft, tactile stimulation
that monkeys so obviously seek.10 Yes, human babies become attached
to inanimate objects like security blankets or teddy bears, but primarily
as backups when more animated and communicative sources of security
are out of reach.11 By the second or third month, human babies actively
seek a higher level of emotional responsiveness, mediated by increasingly
long and expressive looks and by high-pitched, soothing queries.12 When
the psychiatrist Ed Tronick asked mothers to don expressionless “still-
face” masks, babies who failed to find the emotional responses they
sought became apprehensive. When the ar­ti­fic ­ ial face looking back at
them continued to appear blank, they became distressed. 13

rs.20
If human babies are sensitive to such signals, it follows that they are
capable of attributing mental and emotional states to others—that is,
they are capable of some level of intersubjective involvement. I am argu-
ing that the most plausible way to explain this difference between hu-
mans and other apes is to take into account the vast stretch of time (per-
haps as long as two million years) during which babies who were better
at gauging the intentions of others and engaging them were also better
at eliciting care, and hence more likely to survive into adulthood and re-
produce. Children who develop this way are also going to be naturally
more responsive to disapproval, social sanctions, and behaviors affecting
not just sta­tus but reputation.

7 Yet human babies still seem to need something more
than tactile contact, some extra reassurance of maternal commitment.
Throughout the evolutionary history of other apes, the mother was ei-
ther there and highly motivated to remain in continuous touch with her
baby or else she was incapacitated and probably dead. By contrast, the
challenges confronted by early human infants have always been more
com­pli­cated.

Bowlby interpreted maternal sensitivity as a sign of a mother’s “re-
spect” for her baby. From my perspective, the message sought by an in-
fant born to a species in which maternal commitment is far from guar-
anteed is more nearly “You will be cared for no matter what.”

Psychologists already know that the more direct physical contact
there is between a mother and her infant, the less time each party spends
looking into the face of the other or seeking what Bowlby, quoting the
novelist George Eliot, referred to as “the eyes of love” (“A child forsaken,
waking suddenly . . . seeth only that it cannot see the meeting eyes of
love”).31 This observation applies to other apes and holds up across hu-
man cultures.32 In one of the very few controlled experimental studies of
mother-infant eye contact, psychologists Manuela Lavelli and Alan Fogel
found that human babies out of physical contact with their mothers
seek eye contact more. Observing babies between one and three months
of age, Lavelli and Fogel found that being out of direct contact with their
mother’s body (being propped up on a couch nearby, for example) stim-
ulated infants to look for their mother more and, having located her, to
look into her face sig­nifi­cantly ­longer.33
Among other apes as well, reduction in tactile contact produces a
need to reestablish the bond through other means. Recently, Kim Bard
and her colleagues found that the more time a mother chimpanzee spent
cradling her baby close or grooming him, the less time the two spent
looking into each other’s faces. The more they are deprived of touch, the
harder little apes strive to reestablish contact through visual means.34

S T AYING IN T OU C H W I T HOU T T OU C H
Primatewide, two conditions cause babies to vocalize more: when they
are separated from their mothers and when they are in tactile contact
with her but interacting with someone else

Fed or not, babies keep on babbling even after they make con-
tact with a caretaker, suggesting that babbling plays a role in maintain-
ing as well as establishing relationships with parents and alloparents. 40
If Snowdon and Elowson are correct, it is scarcely surprising that bab-
bling has not been heard among continuous-care-and-contact species
like chimpanzees, who indeed may not even possess the physiological ap-
paratus for babbling.41 Chimpanzee infants simply ­don’t need it. Among
humans, however, with their very different caretaking history, babbling
is universal.

As the data poured in, it became clear that many factors in­flu­enced
developmental out­comes for children in daycare. These included the
quality of the infant’s relationship with the mother at home, how many
hours away from home the child spent, child-to-caretaker ratios, and
staff turnover at the daycare center. But the key find­ing was that mater-
nal and alloparental sensitivity and responsiveness to infants’ needs were
better predictors of developmental out­comes like self-control, respect
for others, and social compliance than (within limits) ac­tual time spent
away from the mother was. In the case of inattentive or neglectful moth-
ers, children were ac­tually better off in daycare, where their needs were
often more routinely or predictably met.

Prior to the big NICHD study, there had been relatively little systematic
research on the effects of multiple caretakers per se, much less studies of
multiple attachments. Nevertheless, from the 1970s onward, a handful
of psychologists began to ask about the role of infant attachments to in-
dividuals other than the mother—and in particular, attachments to fa-
thers. Mic

. It is time now to consider
how having relationships with multiple caretakers affects other aspects
of cognitive and socioemotional development.

Yet beyond ac­tual environmental
hazards, the Hewlett survey indicates that the way children interact with
their caretakers in­flu­ences their sense of belonging and shapes how they
feel about the environment they live in.

The others’ level of commitment had life-or-death consequences.
Whenever it was that our ancestors ­adopted alloparental care, it is clear
that this mode of childcare—novel for creatures with the minds of apes—
would have had profound implications for developing young. So just
who were these alloparents likely to be? And why did they help?

No creature in the world (unless, just possibly, a bowhead whale) takes
­ longer to mature than a human child does. 

patrilocal settings, fathers were doing nearly 20 times more
caretaking.64 This flex­i­bil­ity provides the key to the paradox of faculta-
tive fathering. Care is a fungible commodity, and humans have always
been unusually flex­i­ble and opportunistic not just in eliciting care but
also in providing it, relocating, adjusting, juggling, and compensating in
strategic ways.

Cynical as all this sounds, there is a growing body
of empirical evidence about the psychology of fathers and the behavior
of alloparents consistent with such a scenario. Flexibility was, and con-
tinues to be, the hallmark of the human family.65

Most hunter-­gatherers live in close-­knit family units. To this extent,
conventional views about family life among our ancestors are correct.
But the composition of these families fluc­tu­ates through time. What we
idealize as the nuclear family (father, mother, and their children) was of-
ten just a temporary phase, a less-­than-­optimal phase at that, since by
themselves two parents would have been unable to meet the needs of sev-
eral children. In describing the typical or natural Pleistocene family, the
descriptors I prefer are kin-­based, child-­centered, opportunistic, mobile,
and very, very flex­ib
 ­ le. Childrearing units were inherently elastic, expand-
ing and contracting as individuals gravitated away from adversity and
toward not only food and water but locations where either they antici-
pated social support or had reason to expect that their support was
needed by other family members. These alloparental safety nets provided
the conditions in which highly variable paternal commitment could
evolve.

Prolactin, a hormone commonly associated with brooding behavior
in female birds and lactation in mammals, provides a case in point.76
Prolactin levels in men residing in intimate association with pregnant
­women or new babies are sig­nifi­cantly higher than those in other men.
Other hormones linked to maternal sensitivity to infants, such as corti-
sol, also rise in fathers when they are in contact with pregnant mothers
and subsequently with their newborns. On the other hand, testosterone
levels fall.77 Not surprisingly, such changes are correlated, since fathers
who are more involved during pregnancy also tend to be fathers more
involved in caring for the baby during the first year of life.78 The more
prior childcare experience a man has had, the ­longer he has been exposed
to babies, and the more emotionally involved and sensitive to their needs
he is, the more pronounced the physiological effects tend to be.

To underscore this point, in the present chapter I broaden my scope
beyond the Primate order (composed of monkeys and apes who do by
and large have big brains relative to their body size) and examine allopa-
rental caretaking in species that are taxonomically more remote: wolves,
wild dogs, meerkats, bee-­eaters, scrub jays, cichlid fish, paper wasps, and
many others. In doing so, I emphasize how nonessential a sapient or, for
that matter, even a primate mentality is for the sort of situation-­de­pen­
dent decisions cooperative breeders routinely make. Strategic alloparent-
ing was well within the capacities of our prehuman ancestors long before
our craniums started to expand. This is my primary reason for casting
the net wide enough to include nonprimate cooperative breeders. But
there is also another reason.


Their hypothesis is consistent with the recent find­ing that coopera-
tive breeding is nearly three times more likely to evolve in taxa that pro-
duce altricial (helpless) versus precocial (soon able to survive on their
own) chicks. 74 As Ligon and Burt put it, “The genetic basis for helping
behavior is much older than previously appreciated . . . Helping behavior
had its origins as a simple by-­product of misplaced parental care associ-
ated with delayed dispersal or colonial living in lineages with altricial
young.”75

Virtually all African peoples who were living by gathering and hunt-
ing when first encountered by Europeans stand out for how hard they
strive to maintain the egalitarian character of their groups, employing
sanctions against bullies, braggarts, or those deemed stingy, consciously
keeping social strati­fi­ca­tion and extreme skews in access to resources or
in reproduction to a minimum. Men are socialized to suppress more
chimpanzeelike domineering tendencies, and ­women may be as well.
Both in their lifestyle and in their genetic histories, these south African
!Kung, east African Hadza, and central African foragers provide the best
available windows we are ever likely to have into the social lives of our
ancestors.

 Throughout the Animal
Kingdom, and most especially in species that produce immobile, utterly
helpless babies that need a lot of maternal care (the way baby primates
do), infants exude potent signals, captivating the susceptible. Related or
not, infants can be powerful sensory traps.

 Infants have similarly rewarding effects on human mothers. It
should not be surprising that studies using MRIs show activation of
­do­pa­mine-­associated reward centers in the brains of first-­time human
mothers when they look at photographs of their smiling infant.8 Any
number of cues would probably have a similar effect—suckling, soft coos,
a familiar baby’s chuckle, the seductive smells emitted from the glands
on her baby’s scalp.

Nevertheless, preliminary
evidence suggests that do­pa­mine-­ and oxytocin-­related reward systems
are implicated in allomaternal care as well. Mothers are supersensitive
to infantile cues, but in mammals characterized by a lot of shared care,
juveniles and subadult females who have never been pregnant or given
birth also spontaneously respond to infants, huddling over pups to keep
them warm. In infant-­sharing primates s

Once natural selection starts to favor parents and alloparents who are
responsive to babies, this changes the playing field for the infants them-
selves. Wherever babies who attract the most care are most likely to sur-
vive, natural selection is going to favor those who broadcast even more
appealing cues or whose attractive signals are broadcast further. After
all, other immatures may be competing for allomaternal attention as
well. Thus maternal or allomaternal biases in favor of the youngest and
most vulnerable immatures produces selection for traits that accentuate
“babiness,” rendering immatures cuter and cuddlier still, more delecta-
ble to protect or hold.
A self-­reinforcing evolut

ON T HE IMPOR T AN C E OF GIVING B IR T H NEAR K IN
Primate social or­ga­ni­za­tion is famously variable. But across species, two
generalizations hold up remarkably well. First, females who live among
kin are better able to defend their interests than those who leave their
natal groups to forage and breed among nonkin. Second, mothers are
most prone to share infants when they feel con­fi­dent that they can read-
ily get them back unharmed.

From this perspective, ­women past
childbearing age were deemed irrelevant and of no theoretical interest.
This prejudice surfaced occasionally in ethnographic descriptions of old
­women as “physically quite revolting” or “nuisances.” They were depicted
as objects of ridicule—“old hags” whose behavior was obviously not
worth studying.21 Such acco

6 A “prudent” mother could not afford to die before her last child
was in­de­pen­dent. Struck by how especially hardworking old females
were, Hawkes proposed an alternative version of the grandmother hy-
pothesis, arguing that the reason ­women lived ­longer than other apes
after they ceased to ovulate had to do with their impact on grandchildren.
But even with compelling evidence for the longevity and industry of
grandmothers, a seemingly insurmountable obstacle remained: Even if
she were still alive, a hunter-gatherer woman’s mother was unlikely to
live in the same group as her daughter­­­ —or so it was thought.27

Did ancestral hunter-gatherers likewise have matrilineal kin nearby?
We cannot know for sure, but post-Alvarez, long-standing barriers
against thinking this was possible have disappeared. Instead of some
highly conserved tendency, the cross-cultural prevalence of patrilocal
residence patterns looks less like an evolved human universal than a
more recent adaptation to post-Pleistocene conditions, as hunters moved
into northern climes where ­women could no ­longer gather wild plants
year-round or as groups settled into circumscribed areas. In the Middle
East, people began to herd livestock and became increasingly de­pen­dent
on growing crops, storing the surplus, and accumulating property. As
group sizes along with population densities increased, people adjusted
their behavior to these new de­mo­graphic, dietary, epidemiological, and
social realities.

Since then, systematic observations across species have shown that
the presence of a mother makes her daughter more secure. Across the
252
 MOTHERS AND OTHERS
very hierarchical cercopithecine Old World monkeys, among vervets, ba-
boons, and macaques where a female’s rank is inherited from her mother,
having a grandmother nearby has a sig­nifi­cant impact on the childrear-
ing success of youn­ger kin. This is so even if the grandmother is still fer-
tile and preoccupied by her own infants. Just her quotidian presence re-
sults in modest improvements to her daughter’s or her grandchild’s
security. In the case of vervet monkeys, a young mother foraging with
her own mother nearby will allow an older infant to wander about more
freely than at other times. The in­de­pen­dence permitted a two-month-
old vervet with his or her maternal grandmother present was comparable
to that of a three-month-old who did not have a grandmother’s sup-
port.49

First, great-aunts and grandmothers needed suf­fi­cient freedom of
movement so they could live near kin or move to be where they were
needed—that is, they had to have the opportunity to help. Second, old pri-
mate females needed some motive for their increasing helpfulness or al-
truism on behalf of kin. Finally, these old matriarchs had to find some
means to help—something useful they could do to enhance the reproduc-
tive success of youn­ger kin, something so chronically useful that it out-
weighed the extra pressure that females past breeding age put on local
resource

For
­women who knew where to look and who were willing to walk long dis-
tances, dig into hard earth, and carry their bounty back to camp, tubers
provided a widely available if not particularly palatable source of calories
when other foods were in short supply.63
The experience and diligence of old ­women would have been useful
in other contexts as well. In many parts of Af Africa today, tree nuts provide
a protein-rich staple for chimpanzees and humans alike. But perfecting
the art of cracking their hard outer shells can take years.64 Furthermore,
if ev­ery gatherer is a botanist—expert at identifying which plants are edi-
ble versus poisonous and predicting their availability—older ­women are
the PhDs. P

al parasites. But as far as
I know, chimpanzees only medicate themselves. It was the skilled utiliza-
tion of new food sources and technologies in the genus Homo, combined
with the increased importance of sharing and teaching, that opened up
new possibilities for kin-directed assistance between generations and
for altering the cost/bene­fit ratio of keeping older group members
around.67
T HE MORPHING OF G

All con­firmed the importance of postmeno-
pausal altruists. 75 Wherever populations were characterized by high aver-
age rates of child mortality, grandmothers—if available—made a differ-
ence to child survival.
Galvanized by the n

. In all of them, death of the mother in
the first two years proved catastrophic, presumably because substitutes
for mother’s milk and maternal care were so inadequate. But the lethal
impact of losing one’s mother decreased with the child’s age, and in five
so­ci­e­ties a motherless child who survived to age two had as good a chance
of reaching adulthood as a child whose mother had not died. Since two-
year-olds were still far from in­de­pen­dent, other care­givers had to be step-
ping in. And no single class of care­givers made a bigger difference than
grandmothers. Their presence was correlated with higher child survival
in ev­ery one of the twelve so­ci­e­ties for which relevant data had been re-
corded.76


y. Maternal grandmothers in particular attach high
priority to keeping the mother and her children as well-nourished and
healthy as possible. Not surprisingly, the grandmother’s labor is posi-
tively correlated with how much children weigh, which is on average sig­
nifi­cantly more than Bengali children of the same age

n so­ci­e­ties like our own, where intergenerational
transmission of property is both very important and unusually well-doc-
umented, men go to more trouble than ­women do to channel wealth
down the generations to blood descendants, to keep property “in the
family.”100 In hunte'

­Depending on the circumstances, some combinations would be more
ben­e­fi­cial than others, even though—all other things being equal—tho

Just as in modern America, where children tele-
phone grandparents more times each month if they possess sig­nifi­cant
heritable resources, old ­women in foraging so­ci­e­ties are more valued
when the food they gather is an important component of the diet. Along
with ­women generally, they are less valued in so­ci­e­ties subsisting primar-
ily on game brought in by men.

Over generations, devices for manufacturing kin have been cultur-
ally elaborated and maintained. “It is intriguing to speculate,” Wiessner
writes, “that the roots of human kinship systems might lie in coopera-
tive breeding communities where maternal-like care ­comes from a num-
ber of individuals other than the mother, thereby extending concepts of
who constitutes family.” 117 Stratagems include honorary naming devices,
systems of classificatory kin, as well as customs such as designating “ex-
tra fathers.”

but a larger mosaic of life-history traits that derived from cooperative
breeding: bigger brains that are metabolically more costly than those of
other apes; extended lifespans for females after they pass menopause;
and peculiarly prosocial tendencies, especially where food sharing is in-
volved, that distinguish humans from chimpanzees, bonobos, orang-
utans, and gorillas.


Without a doubt, highly complex coevolutionary pro­cesses were in-
volved in the evolution of extended lifespans, prolonged childhoods, and
bigger brains.7 What I want to stress here, however, is that cooperative
breeding was the pre-existing condition that permitted the evolution of
these traits in the hominin line. Creatures may not need big brains to
evolve cooperative breeding, but hominins needed shared care and provi-
sioning to evolve big brains. Cooperative breeding had to come first.

“As the explicit sharing of intentional states be-
came a more powerful force in human evolution,” she wrote in 2005
together with her colleague Katherine Hennighausen, “this shift also af-
fected the infant–parent attachment system, moving the center of the
attachment relationship to primarily intersubjective pro­cesses.” All in-
fant primates are soothed by close bodily contact, but in humans the
sharing of emotional cues became a more important part of the quest
for continuing commitment.24

 All through the Pleistocene, infant survival depended on
the ability of infants to maintain contact and solicit nurture from both
mothers and others. If, in African foraging so­ci­e­ties like those of the Efe
or the Aka, children grew up feeling surrounded by responsive caretak-
ers, it was because as a matter of fact they were. Those who were not were
unlikely to survive. No wonder these children learned to perceive their
world as a “giving place.” Within the first two years of life, infants fortu-
nate enough to be reared in responsive caretaking relationships develop
innate potentials for empathy, mind reading, and collaboration, and of-
ten do so with astonishing speed. Such behavior is the outcome of com-
plex interactions between genes and nurture, and this drama is played
out on the stage of the developing brains. Thus, the development of in-
nate potentials is far from guaranteed.
The end of the Pleistocene marked a conseq

As property accumulated and residence patterns also became more
patrilocal, inheritance patterns became patrilineal. Male heirs were bet-
ter positioned to hold on to intergenerationally transmitted resources.
Such developments led to an increased emphasis on being certain about
paternity. As cultures emphasizing female chastity flour­ished, ­women’s
freedom of movement was severely curtailed. No ­longer could ­women
use sexuality to line up extra “fathers”; no ­longer could daughters move
to be near kin at birth, or mothers move to be near daughters who needed
their help. Increasingly, young ­women found themselves giving birth for
the first time far from their own mothers and sisters, more likely to be in
competition with, rather than bonded to, the ­women they saw around
them.
More important, patriarchal ideologies that focused on both the
chastity of ­women and the perpetuation and augmentation of male lin-
eages undercut the long-standing priority of put­ting children’s well-­
being first. Customs such as sequestration of ­women, chaperoning, veil-

 They will probably be technologically proficient in realms we
do not even dream of yet, as well as ev­ery bit as competitive and Machia-
vellian as chimpanzees are now, and probably even more intelligent than
people today. What is not certain is whether they will still be human in
ways we now think of as distinguishing our species—that is, empathic
and curious about the emotions of others, shaped by our ancient heri-
tage of communal care.










