 form an
attachment to a trusted figure. Secure attachment to one or more trusted
caretakers is an essential aspect of emotional development in humans, just as
it is in all other primates

. Women were assumed to be "naturally" what patriarchal cul­
tures would socialize them to be: modest, compliant, noncompetitive, and
sexually resen-cd. This, I suspect, is the main reason why sexuality has always
been studied separately from maternity, as if sex has nothing to do with mater­
nity or keeping infants alive.

.
 What do we mean by "maternal instincts"? And have women "lost"
them?
2.
 If women instinctively love their babies, why have so many women
across cultures and through history directly or indirectly contributed
to their deaths? Why do so many mothers around the world discrimi­
nate among their own infants-for example, feeding a son but starving
a daughter?

Females were the genetic custodians
of the species, and through their mate choices-when permitted-directed
the course of evolutionary change. 

Should a mother
gamble on an offspring now or reserve herself for some future offspring who
might be born under more promising conditions, or might perhaps be born a
sex that is more advantageous for her to rear? Given that her body is deterio­
rating 0\·er time, when should she throw in the towel, quit producing, and
care for her daughter's offspring instead

. A female's quest for status-her ambition, if
y ou will-has become inseparable from her ability to keep her offspring and
grand-offspring alive . Far from conflicting with maternity, such a female's
"ambitious" tendencies arc part and parcel of maternal success.

The mysterious development of individuals, or ontogeny, includes all
those complex and opportunistic emergent processes that affect how each
genotype develops into the phenotype, the tangible properties of the organism
that are influenced but never entirely determined by genes. 2 Phenotype is
one of those awkward umbrella terms that began narrow, then opened up
through time to cover a larger area. Today the term is still used in the original
way, to describe specific ways that genes arc expressed (as in a particular eye
color or blood type); but phenotype is also used to refer to an entire organ­
ism, or its behavior.
The important point here is that all anyone ever sees, touches, or directly
experiences is phenotypes, neYer genes. It is phenotypes that interface with
the world and interact with others in it. Only phenotypes arc directly
exposed to natural selection. This is why, evolutionarily speaking, and espe­
cially for those like me who study behavior, phenotypes are what matters.
Phenotypes arc produced by interactions between genes and other envi­
ronmental or parental influences. They can be affected by all kinds of vari­
ables-how much cytoplasm the mother delivers in the egg, what other
chemicals she adds, what time of year it is, what the mother is eating at the
time, diseases she might have, even her own recent social history. This is why
sociobiologist Mary Jane West-Eberhard can state so adamantly: "Nothing is
genetically determined in the sense of determined by genes alone. No gene is
expressed except under particular cin:umstances .... It's a kind of biologi­
cal illiteracy to talk about a gene.for anything other than a particular protein
molecule."l
West-Eberhard is not saying that genes don't mattet· but rather that their
powers are inseparable from context, including both external context and
U N L> E H. L Y I N G
 .l\1 Y S T E R I E S
 0 l'
 L> E V E L 0 P M E N T
 lj]
the deyeJopmental context, since genes act by influencing a responsive struc­
ture that is already there. This is true at every level, from immune-system
defenses at the cellular leYel to character at the personality level . It is as
absurd to talk about behavior being "genetically determined" as it is to claim
that genes have nothing to do with behavior.
It is profoundly incorrect to equate "genetic" with "biological," a term that
covers far more than just genetic pmcesses. It is also incorrect to treat nature
and nurture as separable entities, as in saying "The genes interact with the
environment," or "Nurture does not matter." This is why it is unfortunate to
hear the label "biological mother" applied to a woman who has given birth to
a child and giYen it up for adoption, or, worse, just provided the donor egg.
Such a woman is more nearly the genetic or gestational mother. By contrast to a
genetic donor, the biological mother nourishes, nurtures, and provides the
cnYironmcnt in which the infant develops both physically and psychologi­
callY. 4

Not hereditary in any genetic sense, maternal effects can nev­
ertheless influence the speed and course of evolutionary change, trends that
sooner or later lead to changes in gene frequency-the stuff of evolution.

This challenge to Darwinian theory
yielded to an ingenious solution proposed in
 1 96 3
 by British geneticist
W illiam Hamilton. This reserved and self-effacing young scientist came up
with a bold idea-selection at the level of kin-to explain the altruism of the
'
 10
queen s sten ·1 e attcn< I ants.

nstead of focusing on the sterile w01·ker's genetic representation in the
next generation -
 which would he zero-Hamilton expanded the concept of
an individual's lifetinw reproductive success (or fitness) to include the inclusive
fitness of the individual. By inclush·e fitness Hamilton meant the effect that
the female worker's hehavio1· has on her own fitness plus the efl'ccts her
heha,·ior has on the titncss of close kin who share genes by common descent.
Using this principle, Hamilton derived simple mathematical expressions pre­
dicting that altruism should evolve whenever the cost to the giver (which
he designated C) was less than the fitness benefits (B) obtained hy helping
another individual who was related by r, a term designating the proportion of
genes these two individuals shared by common descent. 1

In theory) a gene causing altruistic behaviour towards brothers or sis­
ters will be selected only if the behaviour and the circumstances are
generally such that the gain is more than twice the loss. . . . To put the
matter more vividly, an animal acting on this principle would sacrifice
its life if it could thereby save more than two brothers, but not for
less. 


 Even
if the mother dies, so long as the colony persists, her progeny will he cared
for. 21 It is a mother-centered world geared toward one aim: the survival of
progeny19

For species such as primates, the mother is the environment, or at least the
most important feature in it during the most perilous phase in any individ­
ual's existence. Her luck, plus how well she copes with her world-its

Far from genetically determined, initial development of this new
individual, with its "hand-me-down phenotype," is very much influenced by
maternal condition, her nutritional status or life history. 
Wcst-Eberhard has been foremost among those working to integrate
behavioral plasticity in both sexes into evolutionary theory. W hat fascinates
this wasp specialist is the extent to which genetically similar individuals can
be shunted into different pathways of development according to conditions
encountered early in life. The identical genotype (or at least genotypes that
arc very similar, as in full siblings) could develop into an organism that looks
29
or behaves very differently (that is, exhibits a different phenotype).
The phenomenon of environmentally cued alternative phenotypes within
the same population is known as polyphenism (i.e ., same genotype produces
more than one phenotype). Long overlooked, polyphenism, the outcome of
so many underlying mysteries, is assuming greater importance in the thinking
of geneticists. Anyone tempted by cascading research that identifies genes
"for" particular traits would do well to keep these cases in mind, as reminders
of how much context still matters.

Polyphcnism, with its multiple developmental courses, is too useful a con­
cept to confine to "simple" creatures like wasps and caterpillars. Increasingly,
biologists arc aware that mammals--including primates like ourselves-can
develop along different pathways, even assume different forms or cxhihit
quite different behavioral profiles, 

In part II, I will return to what is the most important of all maternal
effects in terms of infant survival: a mother's decisions about how much to
invest in her offspring, and in some cases even whether to nurture her infant
at all. In part III, I speculate about the significance of maternal commitment
for what the developing human infant learns about its social environment.

Now biologists realize that there are important respects in
which nongenetic, acquired attributes-like immunities, templates for rec­
ognizing relatives, social networks-pass between generations as "maternal
effects," attributes that arc inherited, but not as genes.

Males and females pursue different reproductive strategies. Theoretically,
males compete for fertilizations, trying to inseminate as many females as pos­
sible. There is a strict limit, on the other hand, to how many times a female
benefits from insemination. Her reproductive success depends not on num­
ber of fertilizations but on the contingencies of her life, the qualities of the
mates she chooses, and, above all, how succesiful she is at keeping alive such
ir:fants as she does produce.

In species where survival of young requires extensive care, the single most
important source of variation in female reproductive success is not how many
young are born; what matters is how many sur vive and grow up to reproduce
themselves.19 For such creatures, survival of at least some young requires
reproductive discretion. This is why being pro-life means being pro-choice.
T

infant survival depends on the mother being assisted
by others-the father and/ or various individuals other than the parents-

Ornithologists used to call such assistants "helpers"; primatologists called
them "aunts" (after the British "auntie," to designate a female relative or
trusted family friend). In 1 97), Edward 0. Wilson decided it was time for a
more dignified designation: allo- (from the G1·cck for "other than") plus par­
ent. Since it is only the wise animal behaviorist with access to DNA finger­
printing who knows for sure who the father is, it would he more precise to
confine ourseh·cs to the term allomothers
 -
mcaning all the caretakers other
than the mother (whose identity we arc likely to know for sure) who help
care for or provision young.
Although it may seem odd to refer to a male caretaker as an allomother, all
this means is that he is an individual other than the mother helping the mother
care for her infant. Ornithologists used to call such assistants "helpers"; primatologists called
them "aunts" (after the British "auntie," to designate a female relative or
trusted family friend). In 1 97), Edward 0. Wilson decided it was time for a
more dignified designation: allo- (from the G1·cck for "other than") plus par­
ent. Since it is only the wise animal behaviorist with access to DNA finger­
printing who knows for sure who the father is, it would he more precise to
confine ourseh·cs to the term allomothers
 -
mcaning all the caretakers other
than the mother (whose identity we arc likely to know for sure) who help
care for or provision young.
Although it may seem odd to refer to a male caretaker as an allomother, all
this means is that he is an individual other than the mother helping the mother
care for her infant. 

A mother's body merges into synchmny with her baby's needs, and the
baby's well-being becomes her pressing concern. Parts of these responses arc
incredibly old. Prolactin, the same hormone that coordinates maternal
responses to infant demands for milk, was already orchestrating metamor­
phoses in amphibians and controlling w ater balance in the tissues of bony
freshwater fish millions of years before any mammal existed (sec chapter 6
for more on the role of this versatile hormone). Every aspect of our neuro­
chemistrY
 '
 and emotions has a rich and convoluted historv,
 J
 bearing witness to
multiple long-running legacies that we share with earthworms, amphibians,
small mammals, and other primates.

. But the most critical stimulus for
infant development would be the more or less continuous presence of a sym­
pathetic and responsive caretaker

The reason a human infant's attachment to its mother still resembles
an African ape's is that the most immediate environment of evolutionary
relevance for infants was the mother herse!f, not the physical or social world
Pleistocene humans and Pliocene apes inhabi

nd mind, for better or worse, we passed through the Pleistocene cru­
cible. As is frequently noted, our ancestors lived as hunters and gatherers for
99 percent of the time the genus Homo has been on Earth. This is why I rely so
heavily in this book on evidence from parents who still lived as hunter­
gatherers when they were first studied by anthropologists. 

suggests that alloparents were more important alternatives
to continuous one-on-one contact with the mother than Bowlby had realized.

It is also certain that unlike other Great Apes, women must have lived
in families and relied on other group members to help provision children
who took unusually long to become independent. B

Every living organism, every organ of every organism, not to mention tis­
sues and molecules, whether or not they arc still in use, bears the accumu­
lated imprints of multiple past lives. Never permitted the luxury of starting
from scratch to produce the perfect solution, natural selection recycles
workable solutions for a "good-enough" fit, meaning simply: better than the
competition.

 As they suckled, they triggered the release of ancient
compounds dating from amphibian, mammalian, and primate past lives that
delay the next conception.
Every detail of our bodies has its history, and many of them have conse­
quences

Caretakers of both sexes, wet-nurses, even "daycare"-none of these are
uniquely human, nor particularly new. They are standard features of many
cooperatiYely hreeding species. As we saw, cooperative breeding is exquis­
itely well developed in insects such as honeybees and wasps. Shared provi­
sioning is also common among birds such as acorn woodpeckers, bee-eaters,
dunnocks, and scrub jays. Although cooperative breeding is uncommon
among mammals generally, it is richly developed in species such as wolves,
wild dogs, dwarf mongooses, elephants, tamarins, marmosets, and humans.
In all these animals, individuals other than the mother ("allomothers") help
her proYision or otherwise care for her young. Typically, allomothers will
include the mother's mate (often but not necessarily the genetic progenitor).
Indh·iduals other than either parent ("alloparents") also help. These helpers
are most often recruited from kin who are not yet ready to reproduce them­
selves, or from subordinates who do not currently-or may never have­
better options. In the human case, the most important alloparents are often
older, post-reproductive relatives who have already reproduced.
Amo

Being able to rely on the maternal larder long after birth buffers imma­
tures from local scarcity. Remaining with a lactating mother provides a stable
and viable environment for immatures who would otherwise be unable to
survive severe climate fluctuations.

 Even more fascinating is the likelihood
that when my daughter breast-fed, some of the circulating "peace and bond­
ing" hormones in me were transmitted in my milk to her, acting as a mild
sedative, leaving us both with the impression that being near each other was
deeply satisfying. Unlike prolactin, oxytocin does not have much of a track
record outside of the mammals. Apparently, this kindest of natural opiates is a
relative newcomer on the endocrinological scene, a true mammalian spe­
cialtv .I
 
 In mice, at least, neural pathways in the
mother's brain arc reconfigured just by acts of caretaking. The brain and
responsiveness to maternal hormones and stimuli from pups are different the
second time round; she is really not the same mouse that she was.

All female primates find babies (the younger the better) fascinating, some
more so than others. And why not? Baby-lust improves the chances a new
mother will care for her own baby, and if she is young, motivates her to get
the practice that will make her a more competent caretaker. Finding babies
attractiYe is a luxury primates can afford because the c

Infant-sharing
28
mothers also breed at a faster rate, after shorter intervals.

" \Vith no remedy a\·ailable against postpartum
hemon·haging, safe dcli,·ery of the placent<l is critical to a safe outcome.
Among the best predictors of whether a mother seems indiiTcrcnt or actively
pleased, suggests Trevathan, is how much social support she has.14

ue, glands,
past experiences, and environmental cues, including sensory cues provided
by infants themselves and by other individuals in the vicinity. Complex
behaviors like nurturing, especially when tied to even more complex emo­
tions like "love," cdare never either genetically predetermined or environmen­
tally produced

Commitment of a monkey mother to her singleton, high-cost baby almost
never depends on attributes if the irifant itself, traits like weight, sex, birth
order, or physical conditions that affect survival prospects. Like all mammals,
primate mothers are primed by potent hormonal cocktails during pregnancy,
and at birth are exposed to the newborn's irresistibly infantile signals-its
shape, smell, sounds, and natal coat. The big difference between these pri­
mates and, say, prairie dogs is the extraordinarily low incidence among pri­
mates of maternal failure to attach to their babies. In fairness , however, it
must be noted that primate neonates themselves deserve some credit for this,
since they often clinch the deal by grasping hold of the mother's fur right
after birth. The neonate quite litera

 On this occasion, however, it was as if the
ancient Trojans were battling to win back the body of Hector or some other
fallen comrade. Dropping my quarry and shielding my face, ignominious as
Paris, I beat my retreat










This unconditional commitment to her infant, irrespective of its sex or
other physical attributes, is, as we will see, one of the key differences
between monkey and ape mothers and human ones. Across human societies,
murder rates among men are always higher than those among women. Not
surprisingly, men tend to murder people they are not related to. But when
women cause someone else's death (through sins of omission as well as com­
mission) that person is most like1y to be her own newborn baby. 8 In this
respect, women are utterly different from other primates that, like us, pro­
duce one baby at a time.

 But no wild monkey or ape
mother has ever been observed to deliberately harm her own baby.

There can be no doubt that nonhuman primate mothers have the capacity
to distinguish a healthy infant from a sick one, a son from a daughter. Yet there
is no evidence that mothers usc such information to discriminate among their
offspring. They never withhold care on the basis if physical attributes like sex,
age, 12 or poor health. Their willingness to care is not affected by infant quality.
In this respect, nonhuman primate mothers differ markedly from many
human ones. This is not to say that no monkey or ape ever abandons an off­
spring. Under extreme circumstances they do so. But abandonment depends
on the mother's condition or social situation, rather than attributes of the
infant itself. The circumstances are as revealing as they are unusual.

Cases of wi1d monkey mothers who abandon their babies almost always
im·olve mothers in very poor condition or faced with terrible predicaments.
A case in point would be a mother confronted with the arrival in her group of
a determinedly infanticidal male.

"Unconditional" versus "Contingent" Commitment
Giving birth as they do to one widely spaced infant at a time, a monkey
mother's marching song is understandable: "If it clings, I will carry it." But
what else would we expect from a mammal that breeds so slowly and is so
cautious about embarking on pregnancy, so discriminating about which preg­
nancies were continued? The majority of pregnancies, after all, terminate
before implantation of the embryo occurs. Considerable birth management
has already been exercised by the time each primate infant is horn.
The singularity and costliness of each birth is what makes the contingent
nature of maternal commitment among human mothers so especially curi­
ous. Yet there is an enormous amount of evidence (reviewed below, in
chapters 1 2 through 14) that not all women do anything like commit uncon­
ditionally to each baby they bear. The fact that some human mothers give or
withhold care depending on the infant's sex , or some other specific attribute,
is unexpected and curious not because mammalian mothers arc uncondition­
ally nurturing (they arc not) but because other primates are.
No other primate discriminates between offspring on the basis of infant
attributes. My question, then, is: What happened in the course of human evo­
lution and history to make mothers in our own species so much more dis­
criminating than other primates? No other primate, ever, scrutinizes an
infant for defects, or buries a newborn alive because it is horn the "wrong"
FAMILY PLANNING
 PRIMATE -STYLE
sex. Does our extremely contingent nature of maternal commitment mean
that human mothers arc born with less developed instincts, with blanker
slates in this regard than other primates?

Few females subscribe to a social etiquette more exquisitely subtle,
orderly, or predictable than Old World cercopithecine monkeys. As each
female baboon, macaque, or vervet matures, she develops a set of status
expectations about who belongs where. Cercopithecine societies are com­
posed of ranked matrilineal clans, with each clan in turn organized into a
rigid female hierarchy. It is mothers and grandmothers who shape it, by
perpetually monitoring the competition. Matrilineal clans stick together,
rallying to suppress or exclude social-climbing daughters of lower-ranking
lineages, while orchestrating advantageous social positions for their own, ex­
ercising all the tribal "discipline of a small society," as Edith W harton termed
the social hierarchies produced by society matrons in early-twentieth­
century New York.

This means that a young woman pregnant for the first time enjoys the sup­
port of kin at a time that will prove critical for her continued survival as well
as for her lifetime reproductive success. Furthermore, if the marriage does
not work out, as is common, parents arc on hand to support her.

Right after birth, a rapid rise in circulating levels of prolactin signals onset
of milk production. Thereafter, each time the baby's mouth closes around a
nipple, stimulation from the baby's sucking signals the hypothalamus. This
small region at the base of the brain, in turn, lowers secretion of dopamine,
which triggers the anterior pituitary (a small gland ncar the hypothalamus) to
pump out more prolactin. Continued tugging on the nipple causes prolactin
levels to spike higher, increasing fifteen-fold above prenursing levels before
returning to the base level in about three hours-unless the baby sucks again

Ellison and company were helping to unravel an incredibly complicated
system of interconnected, environmentally sensitive feedback loops involv­
ing the hypothalamus, pituitary, and the ovaries (technically referred to as
the "hypothalamo-hypophyseal-gonadal axis"). T he reason breast-feeding
turns out to be so quirky and unreliable as a means of birth control is
precisely because this dynamic system is so keenly responsive to maternal
condition. 4

breaking distances. Birth of another baby too soon could prove disastrous.
Hence Blurton Jones proposed that, in fact, far from limiting population
growth, endocrinological feedback loops that spaced babies at long intervals
actually worked to ensure that mothers replaced themselves, by optimizina
the survival of such infants as they did produce



