 ARENDT AND DOMESTICITY
By Mitchell Verter
    Introduction
    	In The Human Condition and On Revolution, Hannah Arendt argues for a strict differentiation between the domestic and the political sphere, between the private satisfaction of needs and the public enactment of freedom.  In this paper, I will question whether these two spheres need to be as radically separate as Arendt claims.  What would it mean for domestic concerns to play a more meaningful role in public life, for needs to be taken more seriously?  I will investigate this question by first presenting Arendt's analysis of the domestic and political sphere.  After this, I will look at why she thinks that the integrity of the political has been tarnished by the emergence of the social, the sphere that develops when private affairs emerge into the public realm.  She illustrates most vividly the damage that economic priorities can inflict upon political freedom in her discussion of failed revolutionary efforts.  After looking at opportunities for reconciling freedom and necessity within Arendt's work, I will consider two thinkers who argue  for more interconnection between these two principles than Arendt allows.  
    Oikos and Polis
    
    	Arendt commences her criticism of modern society by tracing its evolution back to the ancient distinction between the oikos (home) and the polis (city).  Within The Human Condition, she describes the former as an institution that is in many ways pre-human.  Life in the oikos, she explains, revolves upon the satisfaction of physical necessities.  Within it, one is submitted to the demands of nature itself, compelled to conform to the cyclical demands of one's metabolism: eating and excreting; breathing and sleeping.  One is identified within the family not as an particular individual, but as a member, whose primary responsibility is the reproduction of the species as a whole.  Insofar as one participates in the family, one is not yet human, but still just an animal; something which Arendt refers to as animal laborans. 
    	The oikos is the refuge for a life that not only is pre-human but also pre-political.  The domestic sphere, according to Arendt, is the origin of domination.  The demands of animal necessity are so extreme that they necessitate inhumanity; they compel the creation of a violent, hierarchical order within the private sphere of the home.  In the ancient world, this hierarchy was instantiated through the paterfamilias's despotism over his wife, children, and slaves.  Arendt explains, “It was precisely on these grounds that the institution of slavery was defended and justified.  To labor meant to be enslaved by necessity, and this enslavement was inherent in the conditions of human life.  Because men were dominated by the necessities of life, they could win their freedom only through the domination of those whom they subjected to necessity by force.”1   That is, the violence of necessity is so intense that it legitimates the employment of force.  The patriarch could achieve the freedom of action that made him a citizen only by violently forcing others -- his slaves as well as his wife and children --to provide for his material sustenance. 
    It is unclear how much Arendt   endorses the hierarchical structure of the Greek oikos. She never explicitly criticizes it and never tries to envision a more equitable familial arrangement.  Indeed, she continues to normalize the  perspective of the patriarch by quoting Werner Jaeger's analysis of Greek citizen's dual existence, “besides his private life [he had] a sort of second life, his bios politikos.  Now every citizen belongs to two orders of existence; and there is a sharp distinction in his life between what is his own (idion) and what is communal (koinon).”2  While Arendt seems to accept this claim at face value, I find it to be quite odd.  Although the male citizen could perhaps consider the household as something which he owns, other Greek writers do not make the same sharp distinction between the idion and the koinon.  In the first section of Politics, Aristotle discusses both the home (oikos) and the city (polis) as types of communities (koinon).  Although the patriarch might have been able to overlook the fact that the home was a community, surely those living under his despotism could not.  
    	Accepting Jaeger's distinction, Arendt distinguishes the political realm as a higher form of existence, one in which an individual can transcend his mere animal nature and become truly human.  Whereas life within the home focuses solely on providing for one's biological needs,  the political sphere allows the citizen the possibility of freedom.   Unlike the household in which all are reduced to the similarity of their physical needs, the public realm created by politics allows each person to express and create himself in his full individuality.  Each one of us has a different set of talents and capabilities and different modes of self-expression.  Within the human plurality of the polis, each can express himself to the others in his speech and through his actions, and then await their replies and reactions.  Unlike the modern notion of the self as isolated and atomic, Arendt's conception of the individual  depends on human plurality.  Along with creating a space for the manifestation of freedom, the polis opens up the possibility for genuine human equality, in contrast to the necessary hierarchy of the oikos.  The polis allows men to appreciate the distinctness of everyone's natural individuality while still regarding them as equal participants within the public sphere.  Citing Herodotus, Arendt claims that within the polis, no one was allowed to rule or to be ruled; all lived in a state of isonomy with respect to each other. 
    	In addition to being a site for the realization of freedom, Arendt associates the polis with a certain type of affect.  Illustrating the ideal of citizenship using examples such as the Achilles of Homer's Iliad and the Pericles of Thucydides's Peloponnesian War, Arendt's vision of the good polis is permeated by the spirit of heroic struggle -- of polemos and agonism -- rather than of peace. Although Arendt claims that violence is absent from public life, she still seems regards it as the basis of political virtue.  Shiraz Dossa interprets Arendt's conception of public life, saying “To abandon violence is to risk subjugation by others.  In the public realm, the public self is obliged to be continuously assertive.”3   Like Nietzsche in the opening of Genealogy of Morals (§I.1-§I.5), Arendt defines the good citizen as essentially aristocratic and even warlike.  Therefore, the most essential  civic virtue for her is courage – the courage to abandon the complacent security of the home, and to confront other men.  Above all, it is a place for a self-chosen elite to meet each other and to prove to each other that they are truly human and not just animals. In the polis, they can compete with each other to prove which ones possess true excellence: the very best will be honored with earthly immortality, and will be memorialized for future generations.  
    
    The Invasion of the Social
    
    Arendt claims that, in the modern world, the political has largely been replaced by the social, a sphere that has emerged as fundamentally private, household concerns  have started to assume public prominence.  
    Arendt warns that the egalitarianism of the political realm becomes corrupted whenever its organization becomes modeled upon that of the home.  The very establishment of the polis occurred when the Greeks surpassed earlier family-based institutions, such as the tribal phratra or phyle.  The family was again introduced into political thought by thinkers such as Aquinas, who drew an analogy between the despotism of the father and the sovereign dominion of the king.  As in ancient Greece, modern thought has broken with these familial models of political organization – for example, John Locke's Two Treatises on Government refuted the absolutism of Robert Filmer's Patriarcha, helping to inspire the struggle for genuine political freedom in the American Revolution.  However, the correlation between family and state has reappeared in political discourse under different forms.  For example, nationalist thinkers argued that the state was bound together by a common blood or a common soul, allowing leaders like Hitler to claim that he knew what was good for the German people as a whole.  While the dangers of such totalitarianism might be obvious, Arendt argues that the family has also corrupted the political order in a more insidious manner, within the very concept of the social.  
    Arendt warns that the contemporary world has forgotten the true significance of the political because it has allowed the private concerns of the home (oikos) – economic concerns – to infiltrate the public sphere. Instead of providing a forum for the free self-expression of individuals, for persuasive speech and agonistic interaction, the focus of public life has been reduced to mere housekeeping, focused on the satisfaction of needs.  She explains, “Society is the form in which the fact of mutual dependence for the sake of life and nothing else assumes public significance and where the activities concerned with sheer survival are permitted to appear in public.”4  Rather than manifesting their distinct particularities, social persons appear simply as the members of a common species, like a swarming mass or a herd.  Social life also changes man's relationship to time.  Rather than striving for immortality or building enduring institutions, society focuses men on consumption, such that they chase after short-term satisfactions, and succumb to the cyclical demands of their natural metabolism.  Worst of all, society has disintegrated the most important innovation of politics, isonomy, the artificial equality given to everyone despite their natural differences.  Instead, this authentic political equality has been replaced with the worst sort of familial sameness.  Arendt asserts “The equality of the members of these groups, far from being an equality among peers, resembles nothing so much as the equality of household members before the despotic power of the household head.”5 However, modern society does not even require a patriarchal despot to lord over the masses – notwithstanding examples of dictators such as Hitler and Stalin.  Instead of being ruled by one man, most societies suffer under the conformism of the rule of “no man,” in which all are compelled to adopt to the same standards, to avow the same  interests, and to advocate the same  opinions.
    
    The Perils of Economic Revolutions
    
    According to Arendt, the economic corruption of politics became most severe during the modern history of revolutions.  She avers, “No revolution has ever solved the 'social question' and liberated men from predicament of want...  The whole record of past revolutions demonstrates beyond doubt  that every attempt to solve social question with political means leads into terror, and that it is terror which sends revolutions to their doom.”6  She illustrates her argument by contrasting the American and the French Revolutions.  The American Revolution was a struggle for freedom, an effort to establish a new space for free action and free speech.  In contrast, the French revolution was always guided by the imperative of biological need.  From the beginning, it was driven by the urges of the poor, who sought only material satisfaction.  Having already achieved a certain degree of self-sufficiency, the Americans could focus instead on creating a space for free interaction.  Envious of the American example of abundance, the destitute of  France began to doubt that poverty was indeed an inevitable part of the human condition.  With this expectation that misery could be finally  eradicated, the poor – in Arendt's words – “driven by the needs of their bodies, burst on to the scene.”7  Because the revolution  was determined by biological necessities rather than free choices, it never became an entirely human affair.   Instead, people seemed to be propelled by a some elemental force, swept up by an irresistible current which they could not control.  Such an implacable force was also an intensely violent one.  Biological needs are dangerous when they become political principles.  Nothing is more abject or ignominious than poverty, Arendt avers, “because it puts men under the absolute dictates of their bodies.”8  When such abject and uncompromising hunger became the motor of the French Revolution, the primordial violence of bodily need transformed into the most terrible social violence.  
    	Along with critiquing the economic goals of the French Revolution, Arendt  critiques its  affective quality.  Whereas the individuals within Greek polis were motivated by heroic emotions such as courage, as well as by the dynamism of agonistic action and persuasive speech, the French revolution was motivated by less noble affects.  As before, Arendt's analysis of seems to echo Nietzsche's Genealogy of Morals, this time in its discussion of ressentiment (§I.10 et passim).  According to Arendt, the predominant emotions among the French Revolutionary  leaders were compassion and pity.  She finds both of these sentiments to be quite dangerous.  First of all, compassion does not  establish equality but rather requires a hierarchy.  It is not a respect for the equality of someone's strength or aristocratic excellence but rather the valuation of their weakness.  In order to sustain the emotion of compassion, the other person must be preserved as frail and dependent.  Pity compounds the error of compassion.  Whereas compassion is a passion that links a single individual to another another single individual, pity broadens the gulf separating the subject who experiences it and the person who is the object of it.  Rather than relating to a singular person in his individuality, pity opens its heart to humanity as a mass, relating to them as a mob.  This abstraction from their particularities allows pity to romanticize those who suffer, enabling someone like Robespierre to claim that the more miserable the people were, the more virtuous they were.  These revolutionary leaders employed such emotions to legitimate the wantonness of their cruelty, and to ignore any attempts at negotiation or persuasion.  The impoverished masses responded in kind: guided by their leaders, they released the intensity and urgency of their suffering into the public sphere, exploding into elemental rage and resulting in the  most vicious terror.
    
    Freedom and Necessity
    
    Behind Arendt's criticism of the French Revolution is her complaint that the impulse for political freedom has too often been overshadowed by the desire to be liberated from biological necessities.  Although these goals typically conflict, Arendt also indicates that, under other circumstances, they can interact in a more productive manner.  
    Arendt develops her analysis of the relationship between freedom and necessity in her discussion of Marx.  She praises Marx's early work for imbuing  material suffering with a political meaning.  Employing his  concept of exploitation, Marx explained that the misery of a certain class of people is a result of the oppression by another class of people – the animal violence of poverty is the result of human violation.  Such an interpretation of Marx seems quite generous for Arendt, for it echoes her own earlier condemnation of slavery as a crime against humanity “when it was forgotten that it was man who had deprived fellow-men of freedom, and when the sanction for the crime was attributed to nature.”9  By arguing that poverty was fundamentally political rather than natural, Marx was able to extend the scope of political discussion in a meaningful way. 
    Despite this praise for Marx's early political thought, Arendt disagrees with his underlying assertion.  According to her, the very fact that human beings possess physical bodies means that they will inevitably be susceptible to physical necessities.  For this reason, she condemns Marx's later works for reversing the priority of freedom and necessity.  Instead of redirecting the struggle against poverty into a struggle against oppression, Marx tried to struggle against necessity itself, to strive towards a society of abundance that would liberate the life process from the fetters of scarcity.  He reasoned that once men were free from the need to satisfy material needs, this liberation would bring about true political freedom: finally, people would be free to embark on any course of action whatsoever.  In response, Arendt argues that now, over a hundred years since Marx's death, we know that when animal laborans is released from the demands of immediate physical need, he will fritter his life away pursuing the evanescent pleasures of consumption rather than concentrating on meaningful self-development and enduring world-creation.  
    Arendt's distinguishes between political freedom and economic liberation in her analysis of the Hungarian Revolution.  In 1956, the Hungarians rose up against the Communist party by self-organizing a system of councils.  These councils were divided into two different types: on the one hand, the Revolutionary Councils were creating an emerging political order that would replace the rigid party bureaucracy;  on the other hand, the Workers Councils were tending to the economic needs of the people, wresting control away from the party-dominated trade unions.  While Arendt affirms the existence of the first type of council, she argues that the establishment of the second was a mistake.  Councils only make sense as a political tool, as an instrument for people to organize themselves so that they can effectively administer power together.  However, it is wrong to think that such a political tool could or should be used as a means to organize labor or to satisfy human needs.  She unequivocally remarks, “In the form of workers' councils, they have again and again tried to take over the management of factories, and all these attempts have ended in dismal failure.”10  The orchestration of production, she argues, should never become a political matter, because this always makes it susceptible to political manipulation.  Production is not open-ended like politics but instead is directed towards specific ends.  It thus requires not freedom but reliable control from professionals who know how to manage and administrate it. Averring the opinion of ancient writers, she claims “economics, since it is bound up with the necessities of life, needed the rule of masters to function well.”11  That is, the satisfaction of needs demands the creation of hierarchies  Beyond this, Arendt even denies that the worker's councils were motivated by any sincere purpose.  Instead, she claims that they were motivated by a jealous desire to control the factories where they once labored.  Worse yet, she accuses them of deliberately turning people away from the political councils and redirecting them back to their workplaces.
    Although Arendt  adamantly opposes the introduction of economics into politics, the corruption of freedom by necessity, she does leave some room for their interaction, but it is not entirely clear how much.  She explains that when people meet with each other in the public realm, they work towards a certain interest “which lies between people and therefore can relate and bind them together.”12  Perhaps one could elaborate on this notion of interest to develop an positive Arendtian notion of  materiality.  Arendt seems to be employing such a notion of interest in the preface to The Human Condition “The question [of how we use our scientific and technical knowledge] cannot be decided by scientific means; it is a political question of the first order and therefore can hardly be left to the decision of professional scientists or professional politicians.” 13 It seems interesting that, in contrast to her remarks about the workers councils, Arendt is here deprecating the professionalize of administration.  Despite these comments, it is still unclear to me how much interest Arendt actually takes in this matter of interest.  It seems like all she is acknowledging is that any formal structure must contain a definite matter, but she seems indifferent about what that matter might be.  Contrasting with this affirmation of interest, Arendt  stresses the formal purity of action, eulogizing it as “the only activity that goes on directly between men without the intermediary of things or matter.”14 
    Several of her earliest commentators have criticized her for failing to adequately consider the place of concrete interests within her discussion of the political.  Hannah Pitkin, for example, argues against Arendt's dramatic staging of the political sphere: the public sphere is not just a place for self-manifestation and one's fellow citizens are not merely an audience before whom one presents oneself.  Instead, one works together with one's fellow citizens in a process of determining the future of the community.  Such a process demands that they consider together what economic priorities are important and what constitutes justice.  
    
 Alternatives to Arendt
    As can be seen in the analysis thus far, Arendt's thought harshly deprecates domestic life and warns sternly against its baleful influence upon the political sphere.  In response to her negative assessment, I will spend the rest of the paper presenting two thinkers who offer different evaluations of domestic concerns and offer a different way to bring economic concerns into the public realm.  Before discussing these alternatives, let me first review the main points of Arendt's critique.  
    The most fundamental aspect of Arendt's critique of the domestic sphere is that it is the source of violence and hierarchy  She draws a sharp distinction between our self-assertive actions and our passive dependence upon our bodily needs.  She interprets this physical susceptibility as a primordial violation of human freedom, a primordial subjection to nature.  More troubling still, Arendt argues that this original violation somehow legitimates violence within the home.  She thus naturalizes hierarchy and rulership.  According to her, the domination of women and the ownership of slaves somehow constitutes an appropriate response to the demands of embodied existence; the organization of the home is necessarily violent because necessity itself is violent.  As a political goal, therefore, the satisfaction of needs is antithetical to the promotion of freedom.  Along with this condemnation of needs and domesticity as violent, Arendt also argues that they should remain private matters.  Just as the Greeks separated that which was one's own (idion) from that which was communal (koinon), the home is the proper site for private life, whereas the political sphere is the proper site for public life.  When private concerns infiltrate the public sphere, when society turns its attention to economic needs, politics becomes corrupted.  
    In response to this negative assessment, I will first consider a feminist critique.  Throughout the reception of her writings, numerous feminists have criticized Arendt's model of the political as being fundamentally masculine, beginning with Mary O'Brien's characterization of  her as “a woman who accepts the normality and even the necessity of male supremacy.”15 through Hannah Pitkin's remark that “Though Arendt was female, there was a lot of machismo in her vision.”16   Therefore, it seems productive to confront Arendt with a philosophy that deliberately avoids such androcentrism.  Rather than taking the patriarchal householder as the normative example of what should constitute public citizenship, Virginia Held claims that we should begin by considering the perspective of the mother.  Taking the relationship between mother and child as a model, she develops an ethic of care that can be applied to any scope of human relations.  Like many feminists, she argues that the traditional boundaries between the public and the private are not satisfactory.  Not only does justice need to be imported into the domain of the home, caring must be brought into the political realm.  She states “Values and practices of care most discernible in personal relations have fundamental implications for social life and political organization.”17   Arendt's condemnation of compassion and pity dramatically contrast with Held's emphasis on care.  When one begins with the paradigm of the mothering, one assumes a different stance towards human needs.    In contrast to Arendt who understands bodily needs as individual burdens, Held explains that they indicate ethical connections:  we do not merely suffer from our own needs, but instead are made responsible because we have to attend to the needs of others. 
    Although much of Held's discussion of a social ethic of care is directed against contract theories, many of her criticisms can be applied to Arendt's writing as well.  Contract theory posits people initially as isolated individuals, whereas Held emphasizes that they are already embedded in various familial, social, and historical contexts.  On this matter, Arendt would agree with Held.  Held additionally criticizes the contract theory notion that persons arrive at agreements in an adversarial manner, with each party trying to assert the preeminence of his interest over the others until finally they reach some compromise.  In contrast, Held emphasizes that people first relate to each other empathetically, persuading each other to share goals and interests.  While Arendt would agree with Held regarding the importance of persuasion and shared interests, so much of the dynamic in Arendt's polis is based on agonism and competition rather than any form of empathy. 
	Influenced by Held, Sabine Gürtler develops an interpretation of labor and work that she contrasts with thinkers such as Arendt.  Whereas Arendt conceives of  labor and work as fundamentally private activities and as inferior to public action, Gürtler claims that work is a form of enacting responsibility towards other people.  She states “An activity is designated as meaningful to the extent that it applies in a positive and intentional way to the concerns, desires, and interests of others.”18  Work not  only satisfies specific needs or achieves specific goals; it is also an ethical activity that contributes to the common good and that can help to provide for other people's needs.  
	While Arendt criticizes the very notion of the social for the way that it has corrupted the political sphere, Held embraces the idea of global civil society.  According to her, the growth civic associations are essential for building a public sphere based on relationships of care “In civic associations, members develop enough empathetic feeling for one another to engage in common projects … [They] often think as much about maintaining the association and connectedness it involves as about the individual gain or losses to them resulting from their membership.”19
	Held's discussion of civic associations and other aspects of her thought are echoed in the anarchocommunism of Peter Kropotkin.  Like Held, he denies the Arendtian assertion that agonism is the most essential affect for public relationships.  Instead, he asserts that the most important element is the spirit of mutual aid. “It is the unconscious recognition of the force that is borrowed by each man from the practice of mutual aid; of the close dependency of every one's happiness upon the happiness of all; and of the sense of justice, or equity, which brings the individual to consider the rights of every other individual as equal to his own.”20  In contrast to Arendt, he argues that what held the Greek polis together was not the competition between its citizens, but the fact that they they worked together to create a beautiful society.
	The egalitarianism of Kropotkin's thought also contrasts with the elitism that motivates Arendt.  He condemns writers who glorify the warriors and the leaders while ignoring the everyday heroism that every person contributes to society.  The greatness of these icons who have been immortalized in epics, he claims, is dependent upon innumerable efforts of people whose names have been forgotten to history.  Kropotkin makes a similar argument against elitism in the economic realm.  Opposed to the Arendtian assumption that poverty is an inevitable part of the embodied human condition, Kropotkin argues that the poverty of the poor is a byproduct of the rich having stolen all means of sustenance from them.  
	According to Kropotkin, the most fundamental step towards creating a society based on mutual aid is dealing with people's physical necessities.  In direct contradiction to Arendt, he proposes that we must endeavor to develop a science of political economy that will study the needs of humanity and the best way to satisfy them.  Whereas Arendt naturalizes the domination within the household sphere, Kropotkin argues that this economic reorganization will get rid of even “the last form of slavery,”21 the husband's domination over his the wife.  Most strikingly, Kropotkin proposes  precisely the opposite interpretation of the French Revolution.  Contra Arendt, he argues that the French Revolution failed because its leaders were fixated on political grandstanding rather than solving the more immediate and more essential problem of human needs.  “Imbued with Jacobin ideas, this Government occupied itself first of all with political questions, such as the reorganization of the machinery of government, the purifying of the administration, the separation of Church and State, civic liberty, and such matters. ... They discussed various political questions at great length, but forgot to discuss the question of bread.”22 That is, Kropotkin faults the revolutionaries for wasting their time arguing over abstract ideas rather than dealing with the concrete problem that people were hungry.  The most solemn task of the revolution is to coordinate production in a way that human needs are met.  The way to do so, he argues, is by organizing a federated system of councils between the  agricultural producers and the various factories, which together can coordinate production and consumption to meet the needs of the people. 
	In conclusion, I find Arendt's deprecation of the human needs and of the domestic sphere to extremely troublesome.  While her analysis is internally consistent, it is depends upon two assumptions which to me seem quite faulty.  First of all, Arendt draws too harsh of a line between freedom and necessity.  Like many classical writers, she dignifies man's capacity to be self-assertive in his actions and degrades anything that makes him vulnerable.  This bias is borne out not only in her adulation of the self-assertive citizens of the polis, but also her apparent contempt for the poor.  Although we are vulnerable to our needs, does this necessarily mean that they are violent or that they should be disparaged?  Furthermore, isn't it significant that that other people are similarly susceptible to needs?  Held and Kropotkin point out that human needs call us to our ethical responsibilities and constitute important sites around which people can and should self-organize.  Secondly, Arendt presumes that the home, because it assuages the violence of needs, must itself be violent and hierarchical.  I would argue that, while this perhaps was true for the traditional, despotic household, there must be ways to redesign the family such that is does not normalize domination.  Once we have done so, could we not then meaningfully expand the notion of familiarity -- of empathetic relations -- into the public sphere?

1	Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 53-54.
2	Werner Jaeger, Paideia (1945), III, 111. Cited in Arendt The Human Condition, 24.
3	Shiraz Dossa, The Political Theory of Hannah Arendt (Waterloo, Ontario, Canada: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1989), 102. 
4	Arendt, Human Condition, 46.
5	Ibid, 40.
6	Hannah Arendt, On Revolution (New York: Penguin, 2006), 102.
7	Ibid, 49.
8	Ibid, 50.
9	Hannah Arendt, Origins of Totalitarianism (New York: Harcourt, 2004), 297.
10	Arendt, On Revolution, 266.
11	Hannah Arendt, “Totalitarian Imperialism:  Reflections on the Hungarian Revolution.”  The Journal of Politics 20:1 (February 1958), 29.
12	Arendt, The Human Condition, 182.
13	Ibid, 3.
14	Ibid, 7.
15	Mary O'Brien, The Politics of Reproduction (Boston: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1981), 100. Cited in Mary G. Dietz, “Feminist Receptions of Hannah Arendt.” In Feminist Interpretations of Hannah Arendt, ed. Bonnie Honig (University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1995), 24.
16	Hannah F. Pitkin, “Justice: On Relating Private and Public” Political Theory 9 (August 1981), 338.
17	Virginia Held, The Ethics of Care (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), 148.
18	 Sabine Gürtler, “The Ethical Dimension of Work: A Feminist Perspective” Hypatia 20:2 (Spring 2005), 127.
19	Held, 131.
20	Petr A. Kropotkin, Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution (London: William Heinemann, 1910), 11.
21	Petr Kropotkin, The Conquest of Bread (New York: The Knickerbocker Press, 1907), 148.
22	Ibid, 61-62.
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

01/14/10  07:56:30 PM	FinalArendt_7.1.doc	4 Of 24



