The Home as a Feminist Subversion of the Political  
 In this talk, I would like to take up Jacques Derrida’s challenge to read Levinas’s work as “a sort of feminist manifesto” by considering Levinas’s conception of the Home.  In the second section of Totality and Infinity, “Interiority and Economy,” Levinas explains that the self finds its place in the world , its chez soi, when it is welcomed into the feminine Home. Levinas’s characterization of the home as feminine has been criticized by many as sexist, because it reduces womanhood to a definitive essence and reinscribes her being within a cult of domesticity.  Although there is some merit to this criticism, I think that that one can read Levinas’s analysis in a different manner.  
      First of all, Levinas can be understood as subverting gender norms.  Levinas describes the production of the home as “welcome in itself – the feminine being” (157.)  If Levinas here characterizes feminine alterity by the “welcome” it offers, then we can only conclude that the ethical subject is figured as a woman a few pages later.  “I welcome the Other who presents himself in my home by opening my home to him” (171.)  In fact, my identification as a welcoming woman is the very basis of Levinasian ethics, as “metaphysics, transcendence, the welcoming of the other by the same” (43.)  Even though Levinas’s equation of the feminine with the domestic is problematic, his characterization of ethical subjectivity and ethics itself as feminine already undermines the Western tradition of patriarchal domination.  
      Secondly, Levinas can be understood as not only subverting the dominance of the masculinity, but also his conception of the home can be understood as a subversion of the political itself.  That is, I would respond to the often-asked question in Levinas’s scholarship, “how can his ethics be turned into a program for politics”, with the response that we should instead investigate the home as a model for human sociality.   Levinas breaks with the political model of Western patriarchy that models the citizen according to the old heroic fantasy of the person as someone who has (1) individuated himself away from the domestic sphere, and (2) united with other individuals within the political sphere.  In contrast to this, Levinas’s analysis of the home demonstrates how we are always already dependent upon the domestic welcome of an Other and always already responsible for providing domestic welcomes for other Others. 
      The significance of Levinas’s conception of the home can be illustrated by comparing it with the tradition of Aristotlean thought.  Aristotle commences Politics by explaining that both the home (*oikos*) and the state (*polis*) are forms of human community (*koinon*), but that the *polis* is superior to the *oikos* and encompasses the *oikos* within it.  Overlooking the fact that it is already a type of community, the *oikos* becomes construed as the private dominion of the male householder, and the *polis* as the public realm in which citizens interact.  This public/private split has been reiterated by generations of Aristotelian philosophers, including G. F. W. Hegel and Hannah Arendt.  The most interesting Aristotelian thinker to discuss in comparison with Levinas is, of course, Martin Heidegger.  
  Throughout his corpus, Heidegger understands the home through as a site of departure for the heroic quest.  The feminist scholar Nancy Hartsock explains what the masculine hero fears most is absorption into the maternal sphere.  Insofar as they are born unto women, all human beings are already marked by a dependency upon the maternal.  This dependency persists throughout one’s infancy and childhood, and can even be experienced in one’s everyday experiences of embodied neediness.  Hartsock explains that, at the heart of the heroic quest is a denial of the debt incurred by birth. Instead of contemplating the significance of birth, Heidegger conforms to Hartsock’s characterization of heroic thinking by fixating on death.  Furthermore, his deprecation of maternal birth seems to be correlated with a contempt for the site of maternal communality, the home.  
      According to Heidegger, the most severe danger to Dasein’s quest to uncover the heroic potential of its ownmost authenticity is its absorption into the world around it.  The greatest threat to realizing one’s distinct individuality is the tendency to understand this surrounding world as the space of the home.  Because Dasein dwells alongside the world, it tends to become absorbed in its worldly concerns, thereby forgetting that its most primordial care is for its own existence.  Heidegger explains this distraction by employing metaphors that connote homeliness.  For example, he remarks that Dasein tends to understand its own Worldhood in a deficient manner when it mistakes its existential engagement for “its ‘own’ closest (domestic [häusliche]) environment.”  Heidegger’s articulates his hostility towards public domesticity most explicitly during his account of Dasein’s Being-Towards-Death.  This description constitutes a heroic account of individuation, an account of how one breaks free from the constraints of home in order to uncover one’s unique destiny.  This process commences once Dasein begins to understand the persistently inevitable eventuality of its own mortality.   Such anxiety releases Dasein from its captivation by worldly things, separating it from the numbing tranquility imposed by das Man, bringing it face-to-face with itself, and enabling it to realize its fundamental individuality.  In this account, Heidegger reveals his hostility towards domesticity by describing the state of anxiety as Unheimlich, a word typically translated as “uncanny”, but which literally connotes being without a home (Heim).  Heidegger highlights this connotation in his analysis, stating “‘Uncanniness’ also means ‘not-being-at-home’ [das Nichtzuhause Sein]. … The everyday publicness of the "they", which brings tranquillized self-assurance—'Being-at-home', with all its obviousness—into the average everydayness of Dasein.”  In this account, Heidegger implies that living within the public sphere is like being smothered within the security of home.  One is tranquilized by a feeling of safety, but only because one has been constrained to live a timid existence.  To achieve authenticity, one must break free from this domestic tranquility and realize one’s own heroic destiny.  
      Heidegger rearticulates the deprecation of the feminine locus of the house in hiS wartime writings.  In Introduction to Metaphysics, Heidegger elaborates his characterization of the Greek concept of Being, physis, as the self-blossoming emergence of Being, as something that manifests through the dynamics of violence, power, and struggle.  According to Heidegger, however, this conception became corrupted as it drifted away from its Greek root.  He explains, “This basic Greek word for essent is commonly translated as ‘nature.’  This derives from the Latin translation, natura, which properly means ‘to be born,’ ‘birth.’ But with this Latin translation the original meaning of the Greek word physis is thrust aside, the actual philosophical force of the Greek word is destroyed.”  Exemplifying Nancy Hartsock’s critique of heroism, this quote displays the degree to which Heidegger refuses to accept the reality of human birth, the fact that all created beings are fundamentally dependent.  The notion of a self-emerging, self-manifesting physis seems like a strange male fantasy of independence.  Heidegger refuses to accept the dynamics of creation, that being is not self-emergent but always dependent upon an other that brings it forth.  
      Alongside this repression of the idea of birth, Heidegger reiterates his disdain for the home.  He cites Hölderlin’s translation of the first chorus of the Antigone, “Manifold is the uncanny (Unheimlich), yet nothing is more uncanny than man.”  As in Being and Time, Heidegger employs the term “Unheimlich” to articulate his contempt for tranquil domesticity.  Whereas the previous text had contrasted homeliness with the pathos of anxiety, he now opposes it to the expression of violence.  “But man is the most unhomely of all, because he is the violent one, who, tending toward the unhomely in the sense of the overpowering, surpasses the limit of the homely.” As before, Heidegger displays his scorn for the human nurturance that one might find in a home, asserting that the most fundamental aspect of existence itself is violence.  To become truly human, one must be devoid of any kindness or conciliation; one must confront the terrifying and overwhelming violence of being, and one must become a doer of violence oneself.
      In contrast to the home, Heidegger imagines the most authentic place for human communality to be the polis.  He interprets the polis as emerging out of the Greek articulation of Being itself.  He asserts that physis, the self-standing and self-emerging, is equivalent to logos, the gathering together of the gathered, and that the polis is the site in which this gathering-together occurs.  He further remarks, “Polis means, rather, the place, the there (Da), wherein and as which historical being-there (Dasein) is.”  That is, the very place where human existence occurs, the very Da of one’s Dasein is defined to be the polis.  The polis is thus deemed the space where authentic human emergence can take place; where poets can actually be poets, priests can actually be priests, and rulers can actually be rulers.  Heidegger explains his usage of the copula, stating la: “Be, but this means: as violent men to use power, to become preeminent in historical being as creators, as men of action.”  The polis thereby reveals the space of violence, in conjunction with the creative person to break open new possibilities with his violence.  
      In his various wartime writings on the poetry of Hölderlin, Heidegger appreciates the home in a heroic fashion.  In this heroic conception, the home is never understood as a primordial site of human dependency but instead as an element of destiny, as something that must be achieved through heroic effort, the activity of becoming homely, Heimischwerden.  The home is not a place where one is dependent or where nurturance takes place, but rather the thing that must be acquired in a quest.  “Here ‘the house’ means the space opened up for a people as a place in which they can be ‘at home.’” … “What is one's own in this case is whatever belongs to the fatherland of the Germans.” Heidegger’s notion of homecoming accords with Nancy Hartsock’s analysis of the heroic in that it strives to surmount the maternal sphere and in order to create a new masculine community of heroic belonging.  The home that Heidegger seeks is not one of dependency but of ownership, a spiritual location in which the German nation will discover its own destiny. As before, he fixates upon the polis as the ultimate destiny for the German people.  However, he does not interpret it as the site for violent self-expression but rather as the locus for Heimishwerden.  Like the hearth around which all activity in the home circulates, the polis should become the pole around which destiny of the German nation revolves.  Thus, Heidegger’s wartime meditations on Hölderlin do restore the notion of home, but only by correlating homeliness with a philosophical conception of German political identity and national self-ownership.
      After the war ended, Heidegger’s philosophical meditations on the home took on a more modest and muted tone. In these later writings, Heidegger finally returns to a theme first alluded to in Being and Time, the idea that man’s existence is a kind of dwelling.  Heidegger explicitly remarks “The way in which you are and I am, the manner in which we humans are on the earth, is Buan, dwelling.” Rather than struggling violently against the overwhelming force of physis, they must make room for the emergence of the fourfold.  Despite the transformations in Heidegger’s thought, he still employs the language of power.  For example, he states “Man acts as though he were the shaper and master (Meister) of language, while in fact language remains the master (Herrin) of man. Perhaps it is before all else man's subversion of this relation of dominance (Herrschaftsverhältnisses) that drives his nature into alienation (Unheimische treibt).” In this later interpretation, therefore, unhomeliness is still understood in terms of power: man is unhomely because he fails to recognize the extent to which he is dominated.  Thus, Heidegger still remains incapable of conceptualizing nurturance because he still fixates upon authority and hierarchy.   
      For this reason, it seems interesting to contrast Heidegger’s reflections of the home with the conception articulated by Emmanuel Levinas in his first major work, Totality and Infinity.  First of all, Levinas’s notion of creation contrasts with Heidegger’s idea of Being.  In Introduction to Metaphysics, Heidegger agued that the ancient Greeks uncovered the idea of Being through the notion of physis, the self-blossoming emergence of Being, but that this idea was perverted by its Latin translation as natura, a word that connotes birth.  In contrast, Levinas remarks that  “the idea of causa sui … is belied by birth, non-chosen and impossible to choose … which situates the will in an anarchic world, that is, a world without origin.”  In this statement, Levinas embraces the idea of birth as something that indicates the fundamental dependence of existence, a dependency upon the past that can not be mitigated by any resolute projection towards one’s future.  Levinas similarly underlines this dependence in his discussion of nourishment.  He states, “Nourishment, as a means of invigoration, is the transmutation of the other into the same, which is in the essence of enjoyment: an energy that is other, recognized as other, recognized, we will see, as sustaining the very act that is directed upon it, becomes, in enjoyment, my own energy, my strength, me.”  In enjoyment, one achieves a sufficiency unto oneself.  However, Levinas also indicates that this development of independence is also an ambiguous situation of utter dependence.  Unlike Dasein who projects its own care, the self described by Levinas is someone who succumbs to the elemental forces surrounding it.  Within this discussion of enjoyment is also concealed a reference to maternal dependence: the French term “nourishment”, nourissment, can also be translated as “nursing.”  Therefore, the primordial relationship of the self to the world around it can also be understood as an infantile vulnerability towards its mother.  Lastly, Levinas describes the ultimate step towards achieving human independence is its dwelling within a home.  He explains “To dwell is not the simple fact of the anonymous reality of a being cast into existence as a stone one casts behind one- self; it is a recollection, a coming to oneself, a retreat home with oneself as in a land of refuge, which answers to a hospitality, an expectancy, a human welcome.”  Thus, the independence of the self is ultimately dependent upon what Levinas calls the “feminine Other”.  In order to be recollected (recuillement) into oneself, one must have already received a welcome (accuel).    In stark contrast to Heidegger, Levinas embraces this dependency upon the feminine as a positive component of human existence.
      Beyond the contrast between Heidegger and Levinas, it is important to consider Western philosophy’s long deprecation of the home.  Why has patriarchal thought so consistently refused the maternal influence upon life?  What would change if we were to begin by considering the home as a model for human social relationships?  The feminist philosopher Virginia Held remarks, “Instead of starting with assumptions of isolated, self-seeking individuals accommodating to one another's competitive desires, or of contending economic classes overcoming their conflicts, one might, by starting with the assumptions of life-giving, nurturing beings, imagine entirely different ways of organizing society than are familiar to us.” Perhaps, as Held suggests, admitting the importance of nurturance to our lives would transform the way that we understand ourselves and our society.  Rather than understanding ourselves as potential heroes striving for achievement and individuation, perhaps we should understand ourselves as being shaped by our vulnerabilities -- dependencies that occur not only at the instant of our births, but which are constitute of our everyday experience as bodies.  Once we start to appreciate and validate human neediness, perhaps we can better organize society to administer to our needs, to create institutions of mutual care and support, ones that help to nurture and develop human lives.  
      I would argue that the anarchocommunist project articulated by Peter Kropotkin and others resonates with the feminist characterization of care work as an effort to organize the material world in terms of people’s needs and pleasures.  Kropotkin argues that any claims to private property are absurd because we are radically dependent on infinite others, and thus there is no way that any one can begin to establish ownership.  Each one of us depends radically upon the sustenance granted to us by infinite others.  Kropotkin deduces from this fact of dependency that anarchist society must focus on the satisfaction of human needs.  The question of satisfying needs is for Kropotkin the most essential question of all revolutionary questions and the question of how we nurture each other is the most important revolutionary problem.  
      The revolutionary significance of an anarchism based on nurturance can be observed both established groups such as Food Not Bombs, Really Really Free Market, and Icarus Project.  The spontaneity of such nurturing anarchism can also be glimpsed in the current uprisings in North Africa. What seems remarkable about these revolutions is not just that people rose up en masse to overthrow their leaders, but also the way that they have supported each other throughout. Protestors in Tahrir square, for example, have managed to keep each other fed, have tended to each other’s bodily needs, and endeavored to keep each other safe.  For example, even the Christian protesters formed a human barricade to protect the Muslims while they engaged in their daily prostrations.  
       
       
       Mohammed Bamyeh reports: 
       The people evidenced themselves in a broadly shared sense of personal responsibility for civilization: voluntary street cleaning, standing in line, the complete disappearance of harassment of women in public, returning stolen and found objects, and countless other ethical decisions that had usually been ignored or left for others to worry about.
       They established autonomous field hospitals to treat the injured; formed street committees to maintain security and hygiene; I saw peasant women giving protestors onions to help them recover from teargas attacks. and countless other incidents of generous civility amidst the prevailing destruction and chaos
      
During the ensuing week and a half, millions converged on the streets almost everywhere in Egypt, and one could empirically see how noble ethics—community and solidarity, care for others, respect for the dignity of all, feeling of personal responsibility for everyone--emerge precisely out of the disappearance of government.

At this moment, out of the dead weight of decades of inwardness and self-contempt, there emerged spontaneous order out of chaos. That fact, rather than detached patriarchal condescension, appeared to represent the very best hope for the dawn of a new civic order.

Everyone I talked to echoed similar transformative themes: they highlighted a sense of wonder at how they discovered their neighbor again, how they never knew that they lived in “society” or the meaning of the word, until this event, and how everyone who yesterday had appeared so distant is now so close.

      
1/17/2022 1:02:07 PM	Home_NALS_2.3	Page 9 of 9

