Hand to Mouth:ÿ Levinas's Economic Transfiguration of the Political
	
      Many commentators have endeavored to interpret how Levinas's ethical reflections can be applied to the political realm: how does one go from an intimate situation of face-to-face moral responsibility to the impersonal rules of justice. I would like to suggest that, before we attempt to consider the ethical meaning of the political, we should employ Levinas' thinking to reflect upon the significance of an intermediate region, the domain of the home. By doing so, we may be able to rethink the relationship between the home and the state, the polis and the oikos, an investigation which can perhaps open up new ways of thinking about political economy. I will commence this research by looking at how Levinas reorganizes man's embodied relationship to the world.   Just as he overturns the theoretical project of philosophy by giving speech primacy over vision, Levinas rethinks political economy by orienting man to his environment initially through his mouth rather through than his hand.  By doing so, he disrupts the political justification of property ownership and refocuses upon the economic problem of human welfare.  
      Perhaps the most distinctively human organ, the hand allows the human subject to grasp objects and relate them back to himself, revealing the world as an assemblage of things and the human person as a potential owner.  John Locke's Second Treatise on Government provides the classic expression of this modern orientation of possessive individualism, famously asserting:
Though the earth, and all inferior creatures, be common to all men, yet every man has a property in his own person: this no body has any right to but himself. The labor of his body, and the work of his hands, we may say, are properly his. Whatsoever then he removes out of the state that nature hath provided, and left it in, he hath mixed his labor with, and joined to it something that is his own, and thereby makes it his property. . it hath by this labor something annexed to it.
For Locke, property ownership is grounded on two fundamental facts.  First of all, the human being owns its own person, constituted in and as its body.  Second, this corporeal property enables one to extend one's physical ownership to things in the outside world.  This control is enacted through the human hand which expends individual labor upon external objects, extending one's personal sovereignty over them.  The human hand thereby removes goods from what had been available to all, from what Locke previously calls the "hand of nature" (26), and appropriates them for a single individual.  
      Locke's notion of the laboring hand can be traced to the earlier legal conceptions of the personal sphere.  Adhering to the Stoic maxim suum cuique tribuere (to each according to his own), natural law mandated that (a) an individual has a certain set of entities which belong to him; and (b) it would constitute an injury for one individual to infringe upon those entities which belong to another.  Within the personal sphere were such things as one's body, limbs, reputation, and honor.  Hugo von Grotius argued that, in addition to these static items, the personal sphere was constituted by dynamic capacities, its own actions (actions propriaes).  Locke seemingly goes beyond this natural law conception in claiming that not only does one own one's actions, but that the exertion of this embodied action upon external objects converts those objects into property.  
      In order to understand why Locke thinks labor gives one the right to property, one must further investigate the process of appropriation.  What does it mean to "mix one's labor" with something and thereby to "annex" a thing to oneself?  Locke seems to think that one owns something because it has become part of one's personal sphere.  Karl Olivecrona explains, "Something of oneself is infused into an object.  Then the object contains something of oneself; in this sense it is part of oneself."  This exegesis demonstrates how Locke collapses together two inverse processes, extension and incorporation.  In one respect, extension occurs insofar as selfhood is "infused into" the external world. In another, incorporation occurs insofar as external things are brought into one's selfhood. The two processes work in opposite directions: the first is externalizing and productive; the second is internalizing and consumptive.  
      The confusion inherent in this model raises significant questions. Even if one's own actions belong to one's personal sphere, does that necessarily mean that the things acted upon also become part of that same personal sphere?   Why would this cause the sphere of selfhood to expand rather than just dispersing pieces of the self into the external world?  This question brings up an even deeper problem with the notions of appropriation and acquisition: should acquisition even be considered as a type of labor?   Why should taking something as one's own be considered a positive, productive act?  Doesn't this seem more like an act of consumption than of production?
      When one reexamines the entirety of the Two Treatises to find how Locke resolves the question of how a part of the common good can become the property of a single individual, one quite a discovers a more complicated answer than is often noticed.  Whereas he asserts his "labor theory of property" in the Second Treatise, this appropriation is already justified by an argument from the First Treatise. Locke's egotistical theory of production is already predicated upon an egotistical theory of consumption.  Although he claims that the earth was given to all men in common, he pays little attention to the question of communal well-being.  Instead, Locke argues that welfare is an individual matter, emphasizing the particular interests of each separate individual, explaining "The first and strongest desire God planted in men, and wrought into the very principles of their nature, being that of self-preservation, that is the foundation of a right to the creatures for the particular support and use of each individual person himself" (1st, 88). 
      It is useful to consider Locke's analysis against the background of previous legal debates over the boundaries between one's naturally given personal sphere (suum) and socially-sanctioned property ownership (dominion).  In particular, various writers argued about how to think about human subsistence, about what allows a man to acquire what he needs to survive - as the expression goes, to live from hand to mouth.   Hugo Grotius argued that one could rightfully sustain one's own person by collecting from nature the necessary means of subsistence.    However, Samuel Pufendorf opposed this notion, arguing that even such a meager acquisition from the commons would constitute an injury to others.  Instead, he reasoned, the right to subsist must have already been grounded on some prior general covenant.    When read in this context of this debate, the radical nature of Locke's position fully emerges: the individual drive to self-preservation permits not only immediate subsistence, but all ownership.  "As much as any one can make use of to any advantage of life before it spoils, so much he may by his labor fix a property in." The personal sphere is wide enough to encompass everything that the hand can profitably manipulate.
      By identifying the property-grasping hand as the thing that rightfully grants access to resources, Locke commits himself to a political order stratified by classes.  Given that human labor creates real use value from the raw material of nature, those who most diligently expand their enterprise become entitled to increase their acquisitions.  Throughout his work, Locke assumes the perspective of the industrious and rational proprietor, one who establishes property rights even through the work of his servant.  Locke's identification with the propertied class causes him to focus intensely upon the natural law concept of injury, of what should happen when one person intrudes upon the personal sphere of another. Locke justifies the usage of absolute force when any foreigner dares to trespass.  Even within the pre-political state of nature, the right to self-preservation is so paramount that it allows for murder.  Locke asserts, "This makes it lawful for a man to kill a thief, who has not in the least hurt him, nor declined any design upon his life, any farther than, by the use of force, so to get him in his power, as to take away his money, or what he pleases, from him" (18).  The absolute right to protect one's personal property against a thief applies not only to petty cutpurses but even to the sovereign himself, legitimating a libertarian revolution against any ruler who would endeavor  to seize one's estate.
      Although Levinas was probably not influenced directly by Locke, I would claim that, within the phenomenological tradition, a similar identification of human essence with ownership is vigorously expressed within Martin Heidegger's Being and Time.  Arguably the most important distinction within this text is whether or not human being (Dasein) resolves to live authentically.  This term authentic is the English rendering of the German "eigenlich", which translates literally as "eigen", own and "lich", like, or own-like.  In a manner even more radical than Locke, Heidegger claims that human being is a striving towards ownership, here understood as an existential investment rather than a political-economic one.  For this reason, he commences the Analytic of Dasein by stating that "We are ourselves the entities to be analyzed.  The Being of any such entity is in each case mine."  Heidegger emphasizes how radical is this concept of existential own-ness by contrasting it with the categorical notion of property. "Dasein is its possibility  ... but not just as a property (eigenschaftlich) .. As modes of Being, authenticity (eigenlichkeit) and inauthenticity . are both grounded in the fact that any Dasein whatsoever is characterized by mineness."  
      The ontological character of ownness provides the foundation for all of Dasein's other relationships.  It is more immediate than the attributes not just of human being, but also of the world.  The being of entities does not derive from their inherent properties, but rather through the way that Dasein appropriates them, the way it seizes its ownmost possibilities through its concernful involvement in the world.  Like Locke, Heidegger figures this grasping of the world through the organ of the hand.  One's relationship to a thing becomes more primordial the more we grasp it as a tool, thereby revealing its specific Handlichkeit (manipulability).  We thus overcome the mistaken impression that things are merely self-subsistent entities that are Zuhanden, presented to the hand, and realize how they are Vorhanden, ready for the hand.
      In reaction to Heidegger's metaphor of the hand as the organ through which one grasps worldly things and thereby seizes possibilities, Levinas argues that we first relate to the world through our mouths that eat the elements around us.   Levinas therefore criticizes Heidegger for emphasizing production over consumption, stating that this model of the "world as a set of implements .. bears witness to a particular organization of labor in which foods take on the signification of fuel in the economic machinery.  . Dasein in Heidegger is never hungry."   According to Levinas, one's susceptibility to need and enjoyment precedes one's capacity to manipulate.   
      Levinas reorganizes the embodied relationship to the world in his analysis of enjoyment.  He explains that the ego is first produced as something that enjoys existence.  It leads a contented life by living from its contents, fulfilling itself by filling itself.  Whereas Locke believes that productive manipulation can externalize one's embodied ownership, Levinas describes this initial relationship as one of consumption and incorporation.  It is the process of eating, of nourishment and alimentation, that transmutes the other of the element into the substance of one's self.  The dynamic of food and hunger constitutes not just the sensuality of one's own existence, but also one's responsibility to the other person.  According to Levinas, we recognize the destitution of the other as a hunger, and thus he quotes Rabbi Yochanan "To leave men without food is a fault that no circumstance attenuates."   
      By positing the mouth as the organ through which man relates to the world, Levinas pre-empts the hand's effort to grasp the world as property.  When one is nourished by one's enjoyment, one is affected by qualities but has nothing substantial to hold onto; no way, Levinas claims, to possess the source.  The capacity to situate oneself apart from the elements is granted when one is accepted into a home (oikos), an economic relation that is instigated by the other's acceptance rather than the self's initiative.  Through the distance afforded by the home, one can exercise the power of a hand that exercises labor and identifies property, drawing forth concrete things that endure through time.  According to Levinas, this possession negates the independence of the thing, allowing for the absolute domination by the owner.  This quest for ownership reaches a limit, however, once one confronts the visage of another person, an exteriority that can not be absorbed into my personal sphere or made part of my identity.  Even though one can appropriate the other person's expression as an image or a work, one can not absorb her distance from that expression, her capacity to transform it or deceive with it.  She is both present in and absent from her expression.  The only way that one could attempt to appropriate someone totally would be to murder her, but this would grant one the possession of only a corpse, not the person herself.  
      By removing the self from its intimate relation to the sensual world, the encounter with the other person allows for the emergence of a common sphere.  The world from which I have detached can be possessed not just by me but by any other possessor, someone who can contest and therefore sanction possession itself.  Thus, Levinas refers to items in a general economy not as objects nor as properties but as works. He employs this term to argue against the idea that labor grounds the right to property.  "The product of labor is not an inalienable possession, and it can be usurped by the other.  Works have a destiny independent of the I, are integrated into an ensemble of works." Production expands the personal sphere only by creating something external to the self, situating my expression of myself in a general economy where it can be expropriated and manipulated by others.  Through one's works, one's self assertion is already a self-alienation; one's self-manifestation is already an exposure and a vulnerability.
      Levinas describes the reverse process in a manner that further complicates the idea of ownership.  We partake in the alienation of another person through our acquisitions. The other person, Levinas explains, is manifested through the way that he has expressed himself in his works, so I can acquire a certain kind of access to him by appropriating them.  Levinas explains "we penetrate into this interior world as by burglary and without conjuring the absence."  Levinas's metaphor of burglary seems particularly striking when compared to Locke's defense of property.  As mentioned before, the primary threat against which Locke's treatise defends is that of robbery:  because the primary right of individuals is the promotion of their own self-interest, any infraction upon this privilege legitimates severe retribution.  In contrast, Levinas describes how property is already theft:  works are already situated in a public economic realm, already subject to the dynamics of dispossession.  More strikingly, Levinas reconstrues the way that thievery interacts with the personal sphere.  For him, the robber does not represent the person who takes property away from the sphere of selfhood but rather someone who breaks into it.  
      Levinas further explores the susceptibility of the personal sphere in his second major book, Otherwise than Being.   Otherwise than Being reworks the conceptual architecture of Totality and Infinity, focusing more closely on how the personal sphere originates from a responsibility to other persons. It does so by clarifying an ambiguity within the earlier work:  what is the relationship between the "Other" of the other person and the "other" of the element that one ultimately subsumes as property?  In Otherwise than Being, Levinas demonstrates that before it can appropriate external objects or confront the exteriority of the face, the self is already exposed, already open to otherness.  Even before it identifies its property and its selfhood, the person is already directed by its responsibility to other people. Levinas explains this idea by exploring how sensible enjoyment and consumption are driven by ethical responsibility. As in Totality and Infinity, Levinas explains that consumption is the process by which the self achieves its identity.ÿ "The taste is the way a sensible subject becomes a volume, or the irreducible event in which the spatial phenomenon of biting becomes the identification called me, which becomes me through the life that lives from its very life" (73).ÿ According to Levinas, there is already a hunger within this eating.ÿ Although consciousness fulfills itself with contents, an underlying emptiness perpetually troubles this fullness. This emptiness indicates the presence of the other person's absence, a proximity that splits me open, preventing me from possessing myself.ÿ Levinas describes this process as an inversion and reversal of consumption: eating not only creates identity by internalizing the outside; it is also a "gnawing away at this very identity - identity gnawing away at itself - in a remorse" (OTB, 114).
ÿÿÿÿÿÿ	As something that splits the self open, the phenomenology of sensibility indicates an underlying vulnerability.ÿ In contrast to Totality and Infinity's claim that the self could be characterized as "for itself," Otherwise than Being describes it as a "for-the-other." The very movement of incorporating otherness is also equivalent to being haunted by others already within oneself.ÿÿ The self is already committed to others before it is concerned with itself: it is exposed, posited in an external space filled with the wills of others. In Totality and Infinity, Levinas explained that the sphere of generality was comprised by works that testified to the absent wills of other people.ÿ This would suggest that, when we consume what the world offers, we are appropriating the remnants of others, incorporating their works and their actions as our own.ÿ We are thus claimed by others from the inside; we are created as entities that are already responsible for the legacy that other persons have left behind. Levinas explains "There is a paradox in responsibility, in that I am obliged without this obligation having begun in me, as though an order slipped into my consciousness like a thief, smuggled itself in me" (13).ÿ As in Totality and Infinity, the reference to the thief refers not to taking away an external object, but to penetrating an interior.ÿ In Otherwise than Being, this metaphor is pushed even further, asserting that consumption animates one's own identity from the inside as a responsibility towards others. 
      Levinas describes the reverse movement through embodied metaphors that illustrate the primacy of consumption over production.  Just as one is already invaded from the inside by others, one's own subjectivity is already delivered over to them.  One's own existence becomes transmuted; despite oneself, it is transformed into a substance for others.  Levinas describes this as "a tearing away of the bread from one's mouth to give to the other." As before, it is worthwhile to consider the contrast with Locke:  whereas Locke gives the hand a limitless power to produce and acquire for one's own use, Levinas figures it as the organ that transfers the right of enjoyment and consumption from my mouth to the mouth of the other.  
ÿÿÿÿÿÿ ÿ By analyzing the primary encounter between self and world as one of consumption rather than production, Levinas becomes interesting for modern political-economic thought.ÿ First of all, he provides us with philosophical resources for understanding political movements based on the ethics of consumerism.  For example, vegetarians and vegans argue that consuming animals is participating in torture and murder; the freegan movement subverts the wastefulness of society by recycling excess, and the Fair Trade movement consumes only that which was produced by workers who have been equitably renumerated for their labor.ÿ Whereas such focus was once the purview only of progressive movements, one now finds this emphasis on the ethics of consumption even in mainstream authors like Michael Pollan, who writes "Food consists not just in piles of chemicals; it also comprises a set of social and ecological relationships, reaching back to the land and outward to other people."
      On a more radical note, Levinas's critique suggests some interesting affinities with the anarchocommunism of Peter Kropotkin's The Conquest of Bread.ÿ Like Levinas, Kropotkin criticizes the idea of property ownership because he understands the world to be constituted by the works of other people.ÿ Thus, Kropotkin argues that no individual can lay claim to any particular object because the value of each thing depends on the efforts of an incalculable number of others.ÿ The world within which one acts is already constituted by the historical deeds of past workers; one's actions only become significant because they occur within a contemporary environment where other people currently labor. Given this radical claim, Kropotkin further argues that labor can not validate any kind of ownership.ÿ Rather than focusing on labor, ownership, and production, people should organize themselves in such a way as to satisfy the human needs of consumption. 
ÿÿÿÿÿÿ	Kropotkin criticizes the tradition of political economy from Adam Smith to Karl Marx for consistently commencing their analyses with production rather than consumption.ÿ Our capacity to produce, he claims, is sufficient to produce well-being for all, enough housing, clothing, luxury items, and food.ÿ The thing that prevents people from meeting their needs is the contemporary system of private ownership, a system that allows a handful of exploiters to become wealthy while reducing the majority of humanity to the barest subsistence.ÿ This attitude is expressed most plainly in early political economy by Thomas Malthus's argument that there is not sufficient nourishment to provide for all, "At the great banquet of Nature, there is no plate laid for those who can't provide for themselves."  Instead of allowing this economic system to legitimate itself with the alibi that it practices efficient production, Kropotkin argues that we must begin by considering consumption.ÿ Society, he declares, could only hope to meet the needs of all if it returns to the most fundamental question, the question of bread.ÿI would argue that Levinas's image of the mouthful of bread finds its political echo within Kropotkin's revolutionary declaration that, "We have the temerity to declare that all have a right to bread, that there is enough bread for all, and that with this watchword of Bread for All the revolution will triumph" (69). 
LevinasConference_HandToMouth_2.2   	6/17/2009 11:08 PM	12 of 12

