Hand to Mouth: Production and Consumption in the Economic Body

      The writings of Emmanuel Levinas seek to reconsider the mode through which one relates to the world, demonstrating how this relationship is always mediated through obligations to other persons. This ethical reorientation also involves a rethinking of the phenomenological importance of various organs of the body.  Not only does Levinas overturn the theoretical project of philosophy by placing speech before vision, he rethinks political economy by placing the role of the mouth before that of the hand.  The hand is perhaps the distinctively human organ, one that emerged during evolution once homo erectus stood upon his back legs and became able to orient himself through his front limbs.  The orientation of the hand, of manipulation, allows man to grasp the world and relate it back to himself.  It renders possible the political-economic relationship of property ownership.  This paper will investigate the modern embodiment of ownership in the work of John Locke and in the phenomenological tradition, discuss how Levinas overturns that tradition, and then meditate upon the political significance of this shift. 
      In order for the world to be opened to ownership, it must appear as an assemblage of objects that could potentially become possessions, and the human person must be manifested as a subject who could potentially become an owner.   John Locke's Second Treatise on Government provides the classic expression of this modern orientation of possessive individualism. He famously asserts 27: 
Though the earth, and all inferior creatures, be common to all men, yet every man has a property in his own person: this no body has any right to but himself. The labor of his body, and the work of his hands, we may say, are properly his. Whatsoever then he removes out of the state that nature hath provided, and left it in, he hath mixed his labor with, and joined to it something that is his own, and thereby makes it his property. 

For Locke, property ownership is grounded on two fundamental facts.  First of all, the human being owns its own person, and this ownership is constituted as one's body.  Second, this initial fact enables one to extend one's physical ownership to things in the outside world.  This control is enacted through the human hand which expends individual labour upon external objects, extending one's personal sovereignty over them.  The human hand thereby removes goods from what the world accessible to everyone, what he previously calls the "hand of nature" (26), and appropriates them for a single individual.  Locke's image of the labouring hand seems to be his adaptation of the Natural Law idea that one's own actions (actiones propriae) are an extension of one's personal sphere (suum).  However, he goes beyond the natural law concept by claiming that not only does one own one's actions, but also that the exertion of this embodied action upon external objects converts those objects into property.  
      Although Locke's words are well known, the process of appropriation is still obscure and requires further investigation.  What does it mean to "mix one's labour" with something and thereby "annex" a thing to oneself?  Karl Olivecrona interprets Locke to mean that one owns something because that thing has become a part of oneself. "Since being one's own means being a part of oneself, making a thing one's own means making it part of oneself. Something of oneself is infused into an object. Then the object contains something of oneself; in this sense it is part of oneself." This exegesis demonstrates how Locke collapse together two inverse processes, extension and incorporation.  In one respect, extension occurs insofar as selfhood is "infused into" external world. On the other, incorporation occurs insofar as external things are brought into one's selfhood. The two processes work in opposite directions:  the first is externalizing and productive; the second is internalizing and consumptive.  
      The confusion inherent in this model raises significant questions. Even if one's own actions belong to one's personal sphere, does that necessarily mean that the things acted upon also become part of that same personal sphere?   Why would this cause the sphere of selfhood to expand rather than just dispersing pieces of the self into the external world?  This question brings up an even deeper problem with the notions of appropriation and acquisition: should acquisition even be considered as a type of labour?   Why should taking something as one's own be considered a positive, productive act?  Doesn't this seem more like an act of consumption than of production?
      When one reexamines the entirety of the Two Treatises to find how Locke resolves the question of how a part of the common good can become the property of a single individual, one quite a discovers a more complicated answer than is often noticed.  Whereas he asserts his "labour theory of property" in the Second Treatise, this explanation of appropriation is already predicated upon an argument from the First Treatise. Locke's egotistical theory of production is already justified by an egotistical theory of consumption.  Although he argues that the earth was given to all men in common, he pays little attention to the notion of communal well-being.  Instead, Locke argues that welfare is an individual matter, emphasizing the particular interests of each separate individual. "The first and strongest desire God planted in men, and wrought into the very principles of their nature, being that of self-preservation, that is the foundation of a right to the creatures for the particular support and use of each individual person himself" (1st, 88).  Here, Locke's analysis should be understood as a reaction to previous legal debates over the boundaries between one's naturally given personal sphere (suum) and socially-sanctioned property ownership (dominion).  In particular, various writers argued about how to think about human subsistence, what allows a man to acquire what needs to survive, to live from hand to mouth.  Some writers argued that this would be a natural extension of one's selfhood (suum); others claimed that it would be a case of dominion and thus would require a prior social contract.  Locke stakes out a radical position with respect to this debate because he claims that the individual drive to self-preservation permits not only immediate subsistence, but all ownership.  He expands the idea of the personal sphere wide enough to encompass everything.  "As much as any one can make use of to any advantage of life before it spoils, so much he may by his labour fix a property in" (2nd, 31).   
      In addition to defining self-preservation to be an individual affair, Locke argues that there are individual differences in one's right to act on one's own interests.  Given that human labour creates real use value from the raw material of nature; those who most diligently expand their enterprise are also those who most fully realize their purpose as human beings.  Locke argues that "God gave the world . to the use of the industrious and rational, (and labour was to be his title to it;) not to the fancy or covetousness of the quarrelsome and contentious." (2nd, 36)  Throughout the Two Treatises, he always assumes the perspective of the industrious and rational proprietor.  He concerns himself on how best to safeguard property from injuries committed by those who are typically described as "foreign" (3).    Locke justifies the usage of absolute force in defence against this alien trespass. Already within the pre-political state of nature, the right to self-preservation is so paramount that it allows for murder.  Locke asserts, "This makes it lawful for a man to kill a thief, who has not in the least hurt him, nor declared any design upon his life, any farther than, by the use of force, so to get him in his power, as to take away his money, or what he pleases, from him" (18).  The absolute right to protect one's property against any invasion applies not just to petty cutpurses but to the sovereign himself.  No political power can ever have an absolute power over the propertied class.  Just as an individual maintains the right to kill the thief who invades his home, he may fight against the ruler who endeavours to seize his property. 
      In the phenomenological tradition, a Lockean identification of human essence with ownership is expressed most dramatically within Martin Heidegger's Being and Time.  Arguably the most fundamental distinction within this book is whether or not human being (Dasein) resolves to live authentically.  This term "authentic" is the English rendering of the German "eigentlich", which literally translates as "eigen" own and "lich" like; or "own-like."  In a manner even more radical than Locke, Heidegger claims that human being is a striving towards ownership, here understood as an existential concept rather than a political economic one.  For this reason, he commences the Analytic of Dasein by stating that "We are ourselves the entities to be analysed.  The Being of any such entity is in each case mine".   Heidegger emphasizes how radical is this concept of existential own-ness by contrasting it with the categorical "eigenschaftlich," or property."  "Dasein is its possibility . but not just as a property [eigenschaftlich] .  As modes of Being, authenticity and inauthenticity . are both grounded in the fact that any Dasein whatsoever is characterized by mineness" (42-3).  Ownness is more immediate than property not just within the realm of the self's possibility, but also with respect to the external world: the Being of entities is not defined by their inherent properties, but rather by the way that human being relates to them.  Like Locke, Heidegger figures this relationship through the organ of the hand, arguing that one must overcome the mistaken impression that things are merely self-subsistent entities that are presented to the hand (Zuhanden), and realize how they are already ready for the hand (Vorhanden.)  
      In reaction to Heidegger, Emmanuel Levinas critiques this notion of the human body as an agent that seizes possibilities.  According to Levinas, one first relates to the world through the mouth that eats rather than the hand that uses: man's initial relationship is consuming the elemental rather than acting within Being.  Therefore, he criticizes Heidegger's analysis for its overemphasis on productivity at the expense of consumption, remarking, "[Heidegger's model of the] world as a set of implements ... bears witness to a particular organization of labour in which foods take on the signification of fuel in the economic machinery. ... Dasein in Heidegger is never hungry" (134).  That is, Levinas argues that Heidegger wrongly considers the human orientation towards the world as one of agency and manipulation, ignoring how it is already open to sensation and vulnerable to hunger.
      Levinas explains that the ego is first produced as something that enjoys existence, that lives a contented life, living from its contents, fulfilling itself by filling itself.  The self initially relates to the other through a process of incorporation and not externalization, through consumption and not production.  Levinas describes this initial relationship to the world using the metaphorical language of eating, stating "Nourishment . is the transmutation of the other into the same, which is in the essence of enjoyment: an energy that is other, recognized as other . becomes, in enjoyment, my own energy, my strength, me.  All enjoyment is in this sense alimentation" (111).  
      In order for the one to exercise a possessive relationship with the world, one must already have already been allowed a place within it. Although the human body is capable of labouring and acquiring property, it first finds itself immersed in the affectivity, hearing a rumble before recognizing the coming of the subway, bathed in intensive qualities rather than substantial objects.  Without anything to hold onto, one can not form a relationship of ownership. According to Levinas, the affective element is "coming always without my being able to possess the source" (141).  However, the welcome of other persons allows one to situate oneself within this environment, creating a breach between the self and the elements in which it had been absorbed.  Through this distance, one can exercise the power of a labouring hand which exercises labour and identifies property.  Overcoming the transience of sensual affect, the hand stills the flux of elemental sensation, drawing forth concrete things that endure through time. This possession negates its independence of the thing, allowing for absolute domination by the owner.  
      According to Levinas, this quest for ownership reaches its limit once one confronts the visage of another person.  The other person is an exterior entity, someone who cannot be absorbed into my internal sphere or made into part of my identity. Levinas argues that the other person is not something that eludes the grasp of possession but someone who overwhelms it. Within another person's visage, one envisions two phenomena: although one can appropriate the way that the other person expresses herself as an image or a work, one cannot appropriate her distance from that expression, her capacity to transform it or to deceive with it.  The only way that one could attempt fully to appropriate someone as property, exercise absolute power over him, would be to murder him.  However, this would grant one the possession of only a corpse, not a person.
      In addition, the encounter with the other person alters the self's intimate relationship to the world it possesses and allows for the emergence of a common sphere.  By halting the self's effort to appropriate, the other person both throws property into question and conditions it.   "Possession itself refers to more profound metaphysical relations: a thing does not resist acquisition.  Other possessors - those whom one cannot possess - contest and therefore can sanction possession itself" (162).  The presence of other persons challenges my immediate enjoyment of goods, and removes me from my solitary experience of them.  This allows for the emergence of a general sphere.  
      For Levinas, the realm of generality is populated not by property or by objects, but by works.  Labour not only incorporates things into my existence, it also produces a thing exterior to myself, a work, a thing that attests to the absence of the worker.  Levinas uses this notion of the work to argue against the Lockean idea that labour creates property.  "The product of labour is not an inalienable possession, and it can be usurped by the Other.   Works have a destiny independent of the I, are integrated into an ensemble of works: they can be exchanged, that is, be maintained in the anonymity of money" (176).    Production for Levinas does not expand the personal sphere, but rather creates something external to the self, something that can be expropriated and manipulated by other wills.   For Levinas, my labour not only secures what belongs to me, but also situates those expressions of myself in a general economy where they can be appropriated by anyone.  Therefore, the very act of self-assertion and self-manifestation in a work is already a primary exposure and self-alienation. 
      Levinas describes the reverse process in a manner that further complicates the idea of ownership.  Just as our absence is signalled in the ways that we express ourselves in our works, we also appropriate absences through our acquisitions.  The other person, Levinas explains, is symbolized through the way that he has expressed himself in his works.  Thus, I can acquire a certain kind of access to him through the way the person has expressed himself.  Therefore, Levinas asserts, "we penetrate into this interior world as by burglary" (177).  Levinas's metaphor of burglary seems particularly striking in this discussion of property.  As mentioned before, the primary threat against which Locke's treatise defends is that of robbery:  because the primary right of individuals is to promote their own self-interest, any infraction upon this privilege legitimates severe retribution.  In contrast, Levinas's describes how property is already theft: property is already situated in a public realm, and thus already subject to the economic dynamics of dispossession.  More strikingly, Levinas's example reconstrues the notion of thievery and the way it affects the personal sphere.  For Levinas, the thief does not represent someone who takes property away from the sphere of selfhood, but rather someone who penetrates into it.  
      Levinas further explores the susceptibility of the personal sphere in his second major book, Otherwise than Being.  Otherwise than Being reworks the conceptual architecture of Totality and Infinity, focusing more closely on how the personal sphere develops from its responsibility to other persons.  He does this by clarifying an ambiguity within the earlier work:  what is the relationship between the "Other" of the other person and the "other" of the element that one ultimately subsumes as property. In Otherwise than Being, Levinas demonstrates that before consciousness can appropriate the ex-ternal, the self is already ex-posed, already open to otherness.  Even before it identifies its property and its selfhood, the person is already directed by its responsibility to other people.  Levinas explains this idea by exploring how sensible enjoyment and consumption is motivated by ethical responsibility rather than being a project of self-assertion. As in Totality and Infinity, Levinas explains that consumption is the process by which the self achieves its identity.  "The taste is the way a sensible subject becomes a volume, or the irreducible event in which the spatial phenomenon of biting becomes the identification called me, which becomes me through the life that lives from its very life" (73).  Levinas argues that within this eating there is already a hunger that drives it.  Whereas consciousness is driven to fulfill itself with contents, there is an underlying emptiness that perpetually troubles this fullness.  According to Levinas, this emptiness indicates the presence of the other person's absence.  "The relationship with the other puts me into question, empties of myself and empties me without end, showing me ever new resources.  I didn't know I was so rich, but I no longer have the right to keep anything for myself" ("Meaning", 94).  One's responsibility towards the other splits me open, preventing me from isolating myself as a self-sufficient, self-possessed identity.  Levinas describes this process as an inversion and reversal of consumption: eating not only creates identity by internalizing the outside; it is also a "gnawing away at this very identity - identity gnawing away at itself - in a remorse" (OTB, 114).
      According to Levinas, the phenomenology of sensibility indicates an underlying vulnerability and exposedness to other persons.  In contrast to Totality and Infinity's claim that the self could be characterized as "for itself," Levinas describes it in Otherwise than Being as a "for-the-other."  The very movement of incorporating otherness is also equivalent to being haunted by others already within oneself.   The self is already committed to others before it is concerned with itself: it is exposed, posited in an external space filled with the wills of others. In Totality and Infinity, Levinas explained that the sphere of generality was comprised by works that testified to the absent wills of other people.  This would suggest that, when we consume what the world offers, we are appropriating the remnants of others, incorporating their works and their actions as our own.  We are thus claimed by others from the inside; we are created as entities who are already responsible for the legacy that other persons have left behind. Levinas explains "There is a paradox in responsibility, in that I am obliged without this obligation having begun in me, as though an order slipped into my consciousness like a thief, smuggled itself in me" (13).  As in Totality and Infinity, Levinas's reference to the thief refers not to the act of taking away an external object, but of penetrating into an interior.  In Otherwise than Being, Levinas pushes this metaphor even further, to assert that consumption animates one's own identity from the inside as a responsibility towards others. Ultimately, this leads Levinas to conceive of selfhood as an absolute material generosity.  "The subjectivity of a man of flesh and blood . is a being torn up from oneself for another in the giving to other of the bread from one's mouth" (142).  
         By analysing the primary encounter between self and world as one of consumption rather than production, Levinas becomes interesting for modern political-economic thought.  First of all, he provides us with philosophical resources for understanding political movements based on the ethics of consumerism, such as the vegan movement not to consume suffering and death, the freegan movement to consume by recycling social waste, and the Fair Trade movement to consume only that which was produced in an by workers who are paid for the value of their labor.  Furthermore, Levinas's critique suggests some interesting affinities with the anarchocommunism of Peter Kropotkin's The Conquest of Bread.  Like Levinas, Kropotkin criticizes the idea of property ownership because he understands the world to be constituted by the works of other people.  Thus, Kropotkin argues that no individual can lay claim to any particular object because the value of each thing depends on the efforts of an incalculable number of others.  The world within which one acts is already constituted by the historical deeds of past workers; one's actions only become significant because they occur within a contemporary environment where other people currently labour.  Given this radical claim, Kropotkin further argues that labour can not validate any kind of ownership.  Rather than focusing on labour, ownership, and production, he asserts that people should organize themselves in such a way as to satisfy the human needs of consumption.  
      Kropotkin criticizes the tradition of political economy from Adam Smith to Marx for consistently commencing their analyses with production rather than consumption.  Our capacity to produce, he claims, is sufficient to produce well-being for all, enough housing, clothing, luxury items, and food.  The thing that prevents people from meeting their needs is the contemporary system of private ownership, a system that allows a handful of exploiters to become wealthy while reducing the majority of humanity to the barest subsistence.  Instead of allowing this economic system to legitimate itself with the alibi that it practices efficient production, Kropotkin argues that we must begin by considering consumption.  Society, he declares could only hope to meet the needs of all if it returns to the most fundamental question, the question of bread.  "We have the temerity to declare that all have a right to bread, that there is enough bread for all, and that with this watchword of Bread for All the revolution will triumph" (69). 
PhenomenologicalBody_NewSchool4.2	Page 1 of 12	1/17/2022

