cooperatives and the place of women in cooperative labor and in a certain sense power within that sphere .  keep this question in mind and look at the evidence presented.
primacy of the assembly.  the qualified primacy of the assembly .  grassroots democracy .  a whole ethos that is transformed.  place of women in this as evidence for waht i believe that women tend to get excluded in revolutionized instititiuss of male dominance.  a lot of progress has been made in working with the land directly.   

gender binary of ecocentralism
cooperative and the assembly phallic institution 
the oedipal problem  which sex parent does it identify with 
essentiallism of gender 
the parallel of the 
essentialism of the indigenous 

don't have romanticisation for indigenous

essentializing 
social constructivism  
prioritization of culture over nature
listening to the materiality of the language 

nesta king
ariel salleh ecofeminism  vandana shiva 

Robin Wall Kimmerer is another good one https://milkweed.org/book/braiding-sweetgrass 

Tyson Yunkaporta - https://www.harpercollins.com/products/sand-talk-tyson-yunkaporta?variant=32280908103714 


Ynestra King - https://www.socialdifference.columbia.edu/faculty-/ynestra-king


I am curious to read Kim Tallbear https://kimtallbear.com/pubs/ 


to struggle in revolution to make the world and speak by doing 

birth and creation and creativity 
a problem to our thanatonic revoltion 
cosmology of these cultures.

it is something new

regeneracion
evolutinary becomes revolution 

that we don't conceptualize as such 

landauer of ositive envy
something so wonderful is created that transfigurative that it becomes an inspiration that gives rise to a movement

multiplicity 

many worlds of the coexistence

sezure of power or soeical relation changethe social relation relationships with the world and hte 

autonomous so they can sustain themselves and the regional 


border of monopolopy of power

reenchanting the world  sylvia federici
common moral consciousness

consensus

eric fromm
landauer

we know when our plants are thirsty and when the birds are scolding us
communications with all forms of life

regeneracion

who consensus leaves behind

not fetishist of organization or no organizaiton 


in order for a state to work it has to be subordinated to society

utopian literature

the lazy people who don't want to do the work
nothing happens to them  nothing 

news from nowhere..  tolerated as well but frowned upon

would they want to be part of what we are

charismatic community the community of care is part of the larger spirit


we can have htis conferderalism and hte state can also exist


confederalism strong enough and not get overpowered by the state  


post patriarchal values

domestic sphere
envy carnival and fun 