. The goal of this book will be to explain the early origins of
the mutual understanding, giving impulses, mind reading, and other hy-
persocial tendencies that make this possible.

. A growing body of research is persuading neuroscientists that
Baruch Spinoza’s seventeenth-­century proposal better captures the full
range of tensions humans grow up with. “The endeavor to live in a shared,
peaceful agreement with others is an extension of the endeavor to pre-
serve oneself.” Emerging evidence is drawing psychologists and econo-
mists alike to conclude that “our brains are wired to cooperate with oth-
ers” as well as to reward or punish others for mutual cooperation.11


Only among humans do we find large-­scale cooperative
endeavors involving people who are not necessarily close kin. O

The researchers calculated that once ev­ery 17 years, caloric
defi­cits for nonsharers would fall below 50 percent of what was needed
21 days in a row, a recipe for starvation. By pooling their risk, the pro-
portion of days people suffered from such caloric shortfalls fell from 27
percent to only 3 percent.34


Far from being competitors for re-
sources, nearby members of their own species would have been more
valuable as potential sharing partners. When con­flicts did loom, moving
on would have been more practical as well as less risky than fight­ing.50
Nevertheless, from the early days of evolutionary anthropology 


Nevertheless, from the early days of evolutionary anthropology to
today’s textbooks in evolutionary psychology, the tendency has been to
devote more space to aggression and our “killer instincts” or to empha-
size “demonic” chimpanzeelike tendencies for males to join with other
males in their group to hunt neighboring groups and intimidate, beat,
torture, and kill them.51 No doubt our Pleistocene ancestors experienced
jealousy, competed for reputation, and harbored grudges or desires for
retribution that occasionally escalated into mayhem. Homicides among
hunter-­gatherers are well documented, often crimes of passion involv-
ing ­women. But such killings tend to involve individuals who know each
other rather than warfare between adjacent groups. In

pared with other apes.
Yet textbooks in fields like evolutionary psychology devote far more
space to aggression, or to how men and ­women competed for or appealed
to mates, than they do to how much early humans shared with one
­ another to jointly rear offspring.55 Even when human hypersociality is
noted, explanations tend to emphasize between-­group competition
rather than how dif­fi­cult it was to ensure the survival to breeding age of
costly, slow-­maturing children. Yet as this book will make clear, without
shared care and provisioning, all that inter-­ and intragroup strategizing
and strife would have been—evolutionarily speaking—just so many
grunts and contortions sig­nifying nothing.

 Custom, language, and personal experiences shape the
­spe­cifics, but the urge to share is hard-­wired, and neurophysiologists
are getting to the point where they can ac­tually monitor, if still only
crudely, the plea­sure humans derive from being generous, helping, and
sharing

? How could natural selection ever have favored the
peculiarly empathic qualities that over the course of human evolution
have served our species of emotionally modern humans so well?

Mothers and Others is about the emergence of a particular mode of child­
rearing known as “cooperative breeding” and its psychological impli­
cations for apes in the line leading to Homo sapiens. A

here emerged
in Africa a line of apes that began to be interested in the mental and sub-
jective lives—the thoughts and feelings—of others, interested in under-
standing them. These apes were markedly different from the common
ancestors they shared with chimpanzees, and in this respect they were
already emotionally modern.

Compared with other primates, humans are born far more eager to share
the mental and affective states of others.
So far as most psychiatrists are concerned, caring about someone
else’s mental as well as their physical state (whethe

Natural selection favored babies who
were sensitive to their mother’s body warmth and smells, able to squirm
close to her and latch onto her teats, and capable of signaling effectively
(and safely) when separated. It is no accident that the first regions of the
neocortex to form in utero are those that eventually represent and con-
trol sucking actions by the mouth and tongue. Once a baby is born, wrig-
gles close to his mother, and locates a nipple, he e will need to wrap his lips
around it, latch tight, and suck so as to stay fed and, just as importantly,
to further stimulate his mother’s nurturing impulses. The tugging at her
nipples stimulates the production of prolactin along with a surge of the
neuropeptide oxytocin, with its pleasurable and soothing effects.

mind reading hypothesis -- the machavellian intelligence hupothesis 

Higher primates possess a general social intelligence that equips
them to differentiate probable kin from nonkin, assess the strengths and
weaknesses of different individuals, keep track of past social interac-
tions in order to predict who is currently dominant to whom or who is
likely to reciprocate and who will not.36 To cope with social complexity,
monkeys and apes alike have to be w

All this
started to change around the beginning of the twenty-­first century, when
revolutionary discoveries about what other apes are ac­tually capable of
forced reconsideration of the question of why humans are so much more
inclined than other apes toward intersubjective engagement


visage 
s. Eyes, long celebrated by poets as
“windows” into the human soul, played a big role in such assumptions.
But what is distinctive about human eyes that allows this unique depth
of insight?

 Like many animals, Old
World monkeys and apes find it unnerving to be stared at (though, curi-
ously, this is not true for New World monkeys 

But meanings conveyed by long looks can also be quite variable. Human
eyes convey extra information about what an individual is feeling, look-
ing at, and intending. True, other apes also focus, squint, and blink, and
their eyes register patterns involving light and color the same way hu-
man eyes do. Other primates like baboons call attention to their eyes by
lowering pale lids and “flashing” their brows upward in arches of great
sig­nifi­cance much like humans do. But humans communicate with their
eyes more; many humans emphasize the direction of their gaze with a
conspicuous white surround highlighting exactly where the pupils are
pointed.56

 The chimpanzee babies most prone to extended
eye-­to-­eye contact with humans were the ones who had been separated
from their mothers and were especially eager to reestablish any kind of
contact.

 What happened, then, in the line
leading to the genus Homo to favor evolution of these traits? In this chap-
ter and the next I hypothesize that novel rearing conditions among a line
of early hominins meant that youngsters grew up depending on a wider
range of caretakers than just their mothers, and this de­pen­dence pro-
duced selection pressures that favored individuals who were better at de-
coding the mental states of others, and figuring out who would help and
who would hurt.
It is often as

 Long before our ancestors
evolved into big-­brained, anatomically modern humans, early hominins
were being reared by alloparents as well as parents. Once outed, this
long-­hidden secret in our family closet requires us to consider exactly
what roles these hitherto unacknowledged benefactors played.

Of all the attachments mammalian babies form, none is more pow-
erful than that between baby primates and their mothers.3 The emo-
tional ties that bind ape mothers to their infants and infants to their
mothers are unusually long-­lasting. Under natural conditions, an orang-
utan, chimpanzee, or gorilla baby nurses for four to seven years and at
the outset is inseparable from his mother, remaining in intimate front-­
to-­front contact 100 percent of the day and night. The earliest a wild
chimpanzee mother has ever been observed to voluntarily let a baby out
of her grasp is three and a half months.4

But whereas the nonhuman
ape mother undiscriminatingly accepts any infant born to her without
taking into account physical at­tri­butes, the human mother’s devotion is
more conditional. A newborn perceived as defective may be drowned,
buried alive, or simply wrapped in leaves and left in the bush within
hours of birth.13 “Defective” may mean anything from having too many
toes to too few. It may mean being born with a deformed limb or at a
very low birthweight, coming too soon after the birth of an older sibling,

Once a baby has nursed at his mother’s breast and lactation is under
way, a woman’s hormonal and neurological responses to this stimula-
tion, combined with visual, auditory, tactile, and olfactory cues, produce
a powerful emotional attachment to her baby