In this talk, I will continue my exploration of anarchafeminism by bringing Kropotkin's anarchocommunism into dialogue with feminist writing on care and motherhood.  In particular, I will consider how Kropotkin's claim that mutual aid and mutual support are "features of the greatest importance for the maintenance of life, the preservation of each species, and its further evolution" with anthropologist Sarah Blaffer Hrdy's discussion of grandmothers in her book "Mothers and Others: The Evolutionary Origins of Mutual Understanding", a book in which she investigates how members of the human species developed the mental and emotional capacity to imagine what other persons are thinking and feeling, and thereby act according to not only their own Machivellian self-interest welfare but also on behalf of society as a whole.

Given that our central term in this discussion is "evolution", my first inclination is to inquire into the meaning of this term.  Evolution, the study of how living systems develop over time, is a particular case of the philosophical inquiry into "Becoming," the study of how all things change over time.   This inquiry into Becoming is typically counterposed against an investigation into Being, which conceives of the world as constituted by permanent essences that underly all particular beings:  upon these substances stand our usage of substantive nouns in everyday language; establishing stable identities and legal persons; situating consciousness and agency within human subjects, and so on. Those who inquire into such permanent essences are often accused of being "essentialist."  In contrast to this approach, the study of Becoming traces how things change over time and space, the manner in which "Mitchell" right here and right now is related to a "Mitchell" a hundred yards away from here, a second in the past or a second in the future.  One of the first thinkers of Becoming, Heraclitus of Epheseus, expressed this problematic in his assertion that no one can  step into the same river twice because it will not be the same person or the same river, and the motto that "everything flows."  That is, the flux of forces fundamentally disrupts the stability of individual identifiable entities.  

But how does this flux occur?  How do these nameless forces interact with each other?  According to Heraclitus, conflict and war constitute the dynamic tension behind the creation of things.  He states "War is the father/king/lord (  πατήρ ) of all; and some he has shown as gods, others men; some he has made slaves, others free"  For Heraclitus, the logic of creative emergence entails a set of patriarchal relations of political domination.  

Although the patriarchal resonance of Heraclitus's thought are not always explicit, his belief that force and conflict are fundamental to the dynamic of becoming, to the flow of change over time has been widely influential 
1.  Atomism, empiricism and  materialism propound the idea that all things arise from a collision of particles that driven by Newtonian forces, like billiard balls knocking against each other.
2.  Spinoza explains that a thing's essence is constituted by a fundamental drive, its own striving to persist in its own being, to increase its own power of action and joyful intensity.
3. Hegel and Marx argue that all historical development occurs through conflicts between dialectically opposed forces
4.  Nietzsche asserts that wills-to-power are the fundamental forces that become expressed through persons and groups, manifested in the strong as heroic virtues and in the weak as resentment.
5.  Deleuze amalgamates ideas from empiricism, Spinoza, Nietzsche, and Bergson, understanding becoming as a process through which desiring-machines form assemblages that constitute identities as temporary effects.  

 Heraclitus theory of Becoming exemplifies the epoch during which early Greek society emerged from what Nancy Hartsock refers to as the "barracks commuity", when the experiences of the masculine warrior hero, the hoplite, furnished the paradigms for philosophical speculation and social organization.  Another Greek author who exemplifies this is Aristotle. Aristotle opens his book on the political city-state by first acknowledging the home as a community dedicated to the sustenance of its members everyday needs and wants, but only insofar as this domestic community becomes dominated by a patriarch who submits this domain to an economic order that will increase his property, allowing him to associate freely with other male warrior citizens in the public realm of politics.  

But is it possible to think outside of these patriarchal models?  Can we conceive of becoming in terms of regeneration rather than domination and creative destruction?  Can we consider community in terms of nurturance rather than dominion and property?  

My understanding of becoming is here influenced by French philosopher Emmanuel Levinas, whose writings describe how every stage of becoming becomes produced not from the collision of nameless forces but from relationships with other persons.  Levinas describes the emergent individual as being steeped within an elemental medium, filling itself with what is other than itself.  This relationship is fundamentally a metabolic one, in which the newborn entity relates to its environment as nourishment, feeding from the world in order to constitute its own selfhood.  However, the otherness of the world ultimately comes to us through relations with other persons.  Our subsistence and persistence in the world is already constituted by a debt to other people who have provided us with the material substance for existence.  The oxygen that constitutes the substance of our being once constituted the substance of another person. The products that we consume are the the alienated remnants of the lives of others, cadaverous remains of their  living labor-power.

THe dynamic of human becoming isn't simply a metabolic one but also a generational one, resulting not only from the incorporation of our environment, but also from the events of birthing and childraising that connect us to generations of persons.  We are neither self-created nor spontaneously emergent but rather born into the world, dependent upon others for our sustenance.  Levinas refers to this combination of material and historical debt as an anarchy because it occurs before the person's beginning and as a maternity in which "I am bound to others before being tied to my own body"

In her book "Maternal Thinking", Sarah Ruddick defines the maternal standpoint not as an instinctive disposition or a specifically gendered role but rather as a set of practices that preserves the life of the child, nourishes their growth, and prepares them for acceptance in the wider society.  Given that human infants are not physically or mentally capable of taking care of themselves for an extended periods of time, the maternal practice that nourishes and sustains human life is essential for both individual and collective survival.  

The work of anthropologist Sarah Hrdy adds an additional dimension to this idea of maternal practice and highlight its significance for Kropotkin's claim that mutual aid is of greatest importance for species evolution.  She explains that evolutionary development is affected not only by the genetic materials passed down but also by the entire environmental context that conditions the expression of that genetic material.  In particular, maternal effects, the environment that surrounds the mother and that the mother provides for the child, profoundly affects its development.  Her capacity to pass upon her own genetic material depends upon how well she can preserve the life of the child and sustain its growth.  However, the majority of mothers throughout history have not been able to focus entirely on a singular infant; most had had to perform some sort of labor as well as raise several other children and to maintain the integrity of the home.  Therefore, the evolutionary success of childrearing does not rest on the mother alone but rather on the community of caretakers around her, allomothers, persons other than the mother who are willing and capable of performing the tasks of childcare, and who will return the child intact to the mother once they are done with it.  Anthropologists have found that the person who has proven to be most reliable in performing this allomothering role is the grandmother.  The grandmother, particularly  maternal grandmother, dedicates herself to keeping both the mother and the grandchild healthy and well-fell, providing the most help to the youngest or least experienced daughter.  Furthermore, anthropologists have noted that the grandmother becomes even more self-sacrificing and heroic as they age, more resourceful and hardworking to feed their grandchildren, and more fearless to protect them from aggressors. 

The presence of these allomothers is essential for the evolution and development of mutual aid.  The human infant is helpless for an extended period of time, time required for them to develop such large brains.  This mental development and emotional conditioning, Sarah Hrdy argues, is essential for the development of our capacity to imagine what other people are thinking and feeling, which is in turn crucial to the development of emotionally modern humans, helping them to foster prosocial behaviors that result in mutual aid.   

In closing, I would like to raise a few questions and concerns.  There is a certain style of posthuman radicalism that seeks to decenter the human person by considering our human becoming in terms of flows and intensities, as the interpenetration of various types of forces and powers, matters and energies.  I would like to make the case that this sort of analysis grasps becoming only as a metabolic process, but neglects to consider the way that we are generated from generations of generations, that this becoming is also a regeneration, originating not from anonymous forces but from named persons who have nurtured and cared for us, a regeneration that connects us to past generations and future generations.  How do make this intergenerational regeneration part of our radical consciousnes and practice?  For me, the first thing that comes to mind is the stipulation in the Native American Haudenosaunee constitution that, “In our every deliberation, we must consider the impact of our decisions on the next seven generations.” Many years ago, during a blockade against fracking materials, I spoke to a Tulalip elder  “This struggle is important because our planet is on fire. As an indigenous woman, I feel a duty to honor my elders and the legacy of my ancestors in caring for this mother earth – and, moreover; I feel a responsibility to my grandchildren and the next seven generations to stand up to the economic machinery propped up by the government, specifically the Port of Olympia, in perpetuating the warming of this planet and the poisoning of water, essential to life.”   