In accord with Levinas’s thinking of inspiration in terms of the literalness of respiration, they are composed with the
cadence of breath and attuned to the systole and diastole of the heart. 

forcing everything in translation
, the
body is “the distinctive in-oneself of the contraction of ipseity and its breakup.”

so means this: “[I]n social relations the real presence
of the other is important; but above all it means that this presence, far from signifying pure and simple coexistence with me, or expressing itself through the
romantic metaphor of ‘living presence,’ is fulfilled in the act of hearing” (148).
This is radical, and Bruns picks up on what is unique here to Levinas: It’s not that
sound is the medium of utterances; it’s that utterances become the medium of sound
itself (107). The sounds and noises of nature disappoint when they are not heard
from the point of view of the utterance, when they remain mired in the tranquility and materiality of things at rest, registered only in the medium of sound
with all its aesthetic self-sufficiency. In contrast, it is the social relation—the
irreducible kinship relation expressed by “all my relations”—the utterance itself
of ancestry and place by which the noise and sounds of nature are at last heard
through an inspired eco-phenomenology. This does not mean that Levinas
characteristically hierarchizes “ethical (i.e., human

the face (TI) vs the side (OTB)
face is a parody of the visage and the visionality and the 
in refernce to the side 


the anarchy of birth 
t “an image or a figure here.” Rather, the literalness of respiration is to be “in
one’s skin”:
The expression “in one’s skin” is not a metaphor for the in-itself; it refers to
a recurrence in the dead time or the meanwhile which separates inspiration
and expiration, the diastole and systole of the heart beating dully against
the walls of one’s skin. The body is not only an image or figure here; it is
the distinctive in-oneself of the contraction of ipseity and its breakup. This
contraction is not an impossibility to forget oneself, to detach oneself from
oneself, in the concern for oneself. It is a recurrence to oneself out of an irrecusable exigency of the other, a duty overflowing my being, a duty becoming
a debt and an extreme passivity prior to the tranquility, still quite relative, in
the inertia and materiality of things at rest” (Otherwise Than Being 109).
For


In other words, I am not convinced that we ought to conflate “the ethical” with “the human” in the way that Toadvine suggests Levinas does. Nor
is it guaranteed that a thinking of the human and other-than-human relation
from the point of view of what it means to become human entails that this relationship will be one of hierarchy and domination as opposed to hospitality and
respect. Still, if we are to encounter Levinas through indigenous inspirations in
working toward decolonial justice, this deliberation occasions an opportunity
for thinking about Levinas’s contributions to eco-pheno


. For example, there is an interview with Levinas to
which many eco-phenomenologists appeal in which Levinas is asked, “Does a
snake have a face?” And Levinas responds, “I don’t know if a snake has a face.
I can’t answer that question.” 

doesn't even make sense as a question  reification of a things


not ethical gravity ?

 and faculty in Tlingít. She noted, in particular, that the
word “Lingít” means “human being,” and she announced that she wanted to
talk about “Lingít tundataani” (Tlingít thinking). In describing the qualities
of Lingít tundataani, she invoked two important phrases: The first is “Tlagu
kwáanx’ i yán”—or, the “ancient ones” whose lives, she noted, “were more difficult than we can imagine, but figured out how to survive in the world because they figured out how to rely on each other, how to be responsible for
each other.” The second phrase she invoked is “Wooch yax yadáal”—which,
Crystal described, “is the phrase used when talking about “speech that is
heavy”: She said, “It is a recognition of all the things, all the circumstances,
that makes words heavy. All the things that one endures, that one’s ancestors
endured—the burdens carried, the hardships, and the understanding that, despite whatever endurance, we don’t make it by ourselves.” 