laws—The idea of "disorder" an oscillation of the intellect between the two kinds of order

Form and Becoming

matter
in the narrow sense of the word, is intended to secure the perfect fitting of our body to its environment, to represent the relations of external things among themselves—in short, to think matter. Such will indeed be one of the conclusions

Henri Bergson. Henri Bergson - Creative Evolution (2008) (Kindle Locations 74-76). Kindle Edition. 

find, first of all, that I pass from state to state. I am warm or cold, I am merry or sad, I work or I do nothing,

Henri Bergson. Henri Bergson - Creative Evolution (2008) (Kindle Locations 166-167). Kindle Edition. 

My memory is there, which conveys something of the past into the present. My

Henri Bergson. Henri Bergson - Creative Evolution (2008) (Kindle Locations 175-176). Kindle Edition. 

Heraclitus
From this survival of the past it follows that consciousness cannot go through the same state twice. The circumstances may still be the same, but they will act no longer on the same person, since they find him at a new moment of his history. Our

Henri Bergson. Henri Bergson - Creative Evolution (2008) (Kindle Locations 224-225). Kindle Edition. 

this. We are seeking only the precise meaning that our consciousness gives to this word "exist," and we find that, for a conscious being, to exist is to change, to change is to mature, to mature is to go on creating oneself endlessly. Should the same be said of existence in general?

CORPUSCLES
molecules, to the corpuscles that generate the atoms, to the "imponderable" within which the corpuscle is perhaps a mere vortex. In short, we should push the division or analysis as far as necessary.

QUANTUM / NORBERT WEINER
superhuman intellect could calculate, for any moment of time, the position of any point of the system in space. And as there is nothing more in the form of the whole than

GEOMETRIC 
We shall see that matter has a tendency to constitute isolable systems, that can be treated geometrically. In fact, we shall define matter

our fashion of thinking, are regulated by this simple law: the present contains nothing more than the past, and what is found in the effect was already in the cause. But

WHY DOES TIME FOLLOW A DIRECTION
Any attempt to distinguish between an artificial and a natural system, between the dead and the living, runs counter to this tendency at once.

In short, the world the mathematician deals with is a world that dies and is reborn at every instant—the world which Descartes was thinking of when he spoke of continued creation.

Continuity of change, preservation of the past in the present, real duration—the living being seems, then, to share these attributes with consciousness. Can we go further and say that life, like conscious activity, is invention, is unceasing creation?

But against this idea of the absolute originality and unforeseeability of forms our whole intellect rises in revolt.


INFINITE POSSIBILITIES OF A TANGENT LINE
the straight line, as you please, for in each of its points a curve coincides with its tangent. So likewise "vitality" is tangent, at any and every point, to physical and chemical forces; but such points are, as a fact, only views taken by a mind which imagines stops at various moments of the movement that generates the curve. In reality, life is no more made of physico-chemical elements than a curve is composed of straight lines.

"An intellect which at a given instant knew all the forces with which nature is animated, and the respective situations of the beings that compose nature—supposing the said intellect were vast enough to subject these data to analysis—would embrace in the same formula the motions of the greatest bodies in the universe and those of the slightest atom: nothing would be uncertain for it, and the future, like the past, would be present to its eyes."[19]

Such adapting is not repeating, but replying,—an entirely different thing. If there is still adaptation, it will be in the sense in which one may say of the solution of a problem of geometry, for example, that it is adapted

A cause may act by impelling, releasing, or unwinding. The billiard-ball, that strikes another, determines its movement

POTENTIALITY HEGEL ARISTOTLE
Hegel Aristotle oak acorn

Salensky, "Heteroblastie" (Proc. of the Fourth International Congress of Zoology, London, 1899, pp. 111-118). Salensky has coined this word to designate the cases in which organs that are equivalent, but of different embryological origin, are formed at the same points in animals related to each other.

creation unceasingly renewed, it creates, as it goes on, not only the forms of life, but the ideas that will enable the intellect to understand it, the terms which will serve to express it. That is to say that its future overflows