birth and death
“Kha-si” means “born from a mother.” The mother is not only the progenitor and head of the clan, but in her role as family priest also embodies a unifying principle. Responsibility for all family rituals lies with her, including the enormously important ceremonies for the dead. She is also custodian of all clan property: the communal house and land, and the income from the work of all the clan members. She inherits her position of official successor to the previous

every man on the councils is, above all, the son of his mother, or the brother of

THIS IS GOOD
It is rather her spiritual role as re-birther, understood literally, that gives women in matriarchal societies their special sacredness.

The journey ends, without exception, in re-birth and is thus not laden with fear, as is death and dying in European culture. The voluntary path of a man to his primordial ancestress guarantees

The guiding values are not competition and aggression, but motherly care and nurturing, upon which the philosophy and social order of the Minangkabau is founded. In light of this, matrilineal descent comes naturally to them, as they see it everywhere in nature: it’s the mothers who bring forth and nurture the next generation: “In nature, every living being was born from a mother.” (Pak Idrus)

is not taboo in matriarchies, but seen as a natural preference. What is retained in this switching of gender roles is the traditional appearance and spheres of life associated with each sex—the female-male polarity is not discarded. This is because matriarchal cultures are grounded, at each level of society, in the practical and symbolic equilibrium of both of these polar spheres—no matter how differently these are defined from culture to culture. This way of ordering the world cannot be broken by the personal preferences of individuals.48

the demise of Mound Builder culture and male dominance in the region. This turn of events was not confined to the Cherokees, but also extended to the Lenapés, who similarly ended the priests’ dominance. Among the Iroquois the revolution against the priests led to the founding of the Confederation

CANNIBALISM
Even Ayonwantha (“Hiawatha”), a Mohawk cannibal war chief who was a general of the priestly class, was persuaded by the Peacemaker to embrace peace and

consent of women. Additionally, the young men who set off in a war party had to be supplied by the women with long-lasting provisions of cornmeal; otherwise, they could not carry out these forays. The women apportioned the food not only for the feuds, but also for the trade expeditions, so the final decisions about these things were in women’s hands. By withholding their political and economic assent, women in the village or town could stop a feud from taking place. And they did stop it, when the elder lineage chiefs thought it was a bad idea. 40

In the clan, a grandmother’s sisters were all called “grandmother,” the mother’s sisters were all “mother,” and the children of sisters called each other “sister” and “brother.” As in other

in Iroquoian society was based on their role in the economy. The Iroquois, like other matriarchal societies, had no private property. All property belonged to the social group; land and house were the property of the clan. However, within the clan women had the sole right to land. The territory controlled by the community was also in women’s hands; men were not entitled to own land. The harvest belonged solely to the women, who shared it out to the rest of the household based on need.

The gifts were of food and furs, quills and ceremonially significant feathers, clothing, and wampum belts, which were valuable as records of important civil affairs and, sometimes, more decorative and commemorative. The supply of food and gift items was in the hands of the Gantowisas, which meant that they had explicit responsibility for rendering and maintaining the Iroquoian gift economy. This was a clear expression of the resonance between the gift giving Earth and gift giving women: just as the mound beds were regarded as the breasts of Mother Earth, the corn her milk, so the gifting of the Gantowisas was compared with breast-feeding.

DEATH AND REBIRTH
The Ogiwe Society, or Death Singers, is dedicated to the secrets of death and rebirth. The women focus on the powers of withering, dying, and transforming; their society complements the Towisas Society. Their ritual responsibilities concern death, the realm of the dead, reverence to the ancestors, and rebirth, all of which were originally in

domain of women. Only women may lead funeral ceremonies and guide the dead into the Otherworld. The public Dance-of-death Ceremonies, which are very ancient, are performed by this society from late autumn until early spring. All these rituals take place at night. The Dance-of-death is probably danced on the fire, a spiritual art mastered by Ogiwe women, but the most important event is the Feast of the Dead, held every ten years, to which all the dead are invited. As contact with spirits of the dead is quite dangerous, this society possesses powerful healing rituals designed to cure the “spirit sickness” that can result when a dead person’s unhappy soul comes into the midst of the living. Both these women’s medicine societies reflect the entire cycle of the year, and of human life, as it is understood in matriarchal spirituality.69


Upon her death from carrying too many children, the Lynx was buried on Turtle Island, where she transformed into fertile Mother Earth, nourishing the people: corn, or “earth-milk,” grows from her breasts, squash from her navel, and beans
from her feet. These are her daughters, the sacred Three Sisters. In one Seneca version, the sacred plant, tobacco, grew out of her head. Other Iroquoian traditions have Sky Woman bringing tobacco form Sky World, or Sapling retrieving it from Sky World.7

The guiding image for the economy is Mother Earth herself, and as with earth, sharing and giving away out of an abundance are its supreme values. The gift is the lynchpin of the economy, patterned after the continuous gift giving of earth and sky.
Matriarchal gift giving supports the securing and maintenance of peace at all these levels.
