Anarchist Feminism starting again

becoming of the world as generated from other stuff than ourselves


Notes from old writing
* the origin of ache in aristotle
* arche means both political and ontological precedence
* natural forms of domination
* the logic of identity, the logic of X and not-X
* A certain way of understanding the Other as opposed to oneself
* The Other as the enemy,  

* Becoming as a polemos, as a clash of opposites.  
* The war of all against all, that conflict is generative of reality 
* formative clash
* Domination of others in the home.  the oikonomos as a site for domination and rule
* Economic word as a battlefield against each other

* Home, ecology, home place
* 

 “Historiography recounts the way the survivors appropriate the works of dead wills to themselves; it rests on the usurpation carried out by the conquerors, that is, by the survivors; it recounts enslavement, forgetting the life that struggles against slavery.”


 Anarchical responsibility is “a responsibility of the creature, a responsibility of one who comes too late into being to avoid supporting it in its entirety. This way of being, without human commitment, responsible for the other, amounts to the fact of human fellowship prior to freedom.”[26]

 This notion that one is anarchically responsible for a world created by others

 Our very material grounding rests upon the corpses of dead laborers. “The value of each dwelling, factory, and warehouse has been created by the accumulated labor of millions of workers, now dead and buried.”[27] 


Relationship to identity as one's substance and as one's responsibility 
Identity as participation
Levinas introduces the notion of an “il y a” (there is), the undifferentiated whole of existence that compels part-icipation, possessing and nullifying any private separation.

Anarchical responsibility is “a responsibility of the creature, a responsibility of one who comes too late into being to avoid supporting it in its entirety. This way of being, without human commitment, responsible for the other, amounts to the fact of human fellowship prior to freedom.”[26]

personhood and authenticity and egoism
one is oneself

How is one oneself?  
concrete materiality of itself
the idea of self-ownership
the idea of identity as a socially comprised network of things
the idea of someone infinitely open to the flux of others

dead matter

By generating a total ensemble of things that answer to the needs of a separated ego, ownership thereby establishes the self’s mastery over external reality.

 but the reduction of the other to the same. … a suppression or possession of the other.

Not just commercial products, but one’s will and one’s body are alienated in the instant that they are manifested. The projects a will initiates are always co-opted by another person.
 As an owned body (“corps propre”[38]), 

 The Other is always approached and appropriated through a doubling of his origination and his death: through his production in a work, his incarnation in a body, and his representation under a concept. At every instant, I seize the Other through his manifestation, suspending his existence, and grasping him historically through the records of his past. T

  Therefore, I — as a consumer, through the things I purchase and use — become entangled in a net of works, in networks of responsibility. These responsibilities manifest in consciousness once I understand that the products which result in my enjoyment are ultimately the results of human and environmental degradation and death.

  one’s ownership of Property is Theft, as the anarchists teach.

  “Such is the definition of [ontological] freedom: to maintain oneself against the other, despite every relation with the other and to ensure the autarchy of an I.”

  “The I’s form no totality; there exists no privileged plane where these I’s could be grasped in their principle. There is an anarchy essential to multiplicity.”

  the meaning of exteriority 

  The State attempts to repress the uniqueness of an individual by subsuming his identity within its dominion. It ultimately does so by restricting the most essential freedom of the individual: his freedom to make and break associations with other individuals.

   Malatesta asserts that “there exists in Man another feeling which draws him closer to his neighbor.”[52] Without any coercion from the state, people draw to work in “voluntarily formed associations.”[53] That is, man’s will, his voluntarism, necessarily refers to an allegiance to other people.

    “Being’s interest takes dramatic form in egoisms struggling with one another, each against all, in the multiplicity of allergic egoisms which are at war with one another and are thus together.”[54]

    In contrast, Levinas asserts that the self is created as someone who is radically responsible for the world of creation, anarchically committed to the Other. One’s own origin is ‘preceded by a pure passivity that is responsibility… it is my responsibility for the freedom of others’[56] Anarchist Mikhail Bakunin similarly asserts this priority of the Other over my Self “Far from being a limitation or negation of my freedom, the freedom of my neighbor is instead its precondition and confirmation.”[57]


    During this period, group after group was pulled into an anarchy of political responsibility for the suffering of Others
    George Floyd
    or him, the overwhelming problem was the same as the one that confronted Antigone: what should one do about the corpses that still haunt the living; how can one make sense of history after so much mass murder? “The unburied dead in wars and extermination camps ... render tragic-comic the concern for oneself and illusory the pretension of the rational animal to have a privileged place in the cosmos.”

    Against this, Levinas asserts in Humanism and Anarchy. “There where I might have remained a spectator, I am responsible.

    ccording to Levinas, political radicalism ultimately finds its origin in this anarchical responsibility for other people. Revolution does not come from mere activism, from violent overthrow, or even from self-sacrifice. These are also qualities admired by fascists — today, by terrorists. Instead, “Revolution must be defined by its content, by values: revolution takes place when one frees man; that is, revolution takes place when one tears man away from economic determinism.”[66] Accepting responsibility for economic and social injustice is at the root of radicalism. Levinas identifies the degradation of the worker with the alterity of the other, saying “the economic deprivation of the proletarian – to be sure, his condition as one who is exploited – constitutes this absolute stripping of the other as other.”[67] Alluding to the solidarity between students and workers during May ‘68, Levinas asserts, “To affirm that the working man is not negotiable, that he can not be bargained about, is to affirm that which begins a revolution.”[68]

The radicals of ‘68, and indeed all revolutionaries “who best merit the name revolutionary,”[69] are characterized by their capacity to substitute ethically their selves for the suffering of other people. Whenever people stand up to power, they do so not merely to fight for their own rights or for the politics of their own identities. Instead, they willingly stand in for the other, declaiming the injustice shown unto him. One hears this sentiment all over the world in every revolutionary statement. For Levinas, the most poignant example of this revolutionary sincerity occurred when the revolutionary masses proclaimed “We are all German Jews” to protest the government’s refusal to allow anarchist Daniel Cohn-Bendit, the son of two Jews who had narrowly escaped Nazi Germany, from reentering France because was not a legal citizen of any country. As an ethical substitution for the suffering of the foreigner, the stranger, the Other, revolution is the most profound ethical responsibility of anarchy. As one May 68 graffito explained, “We must destroy and replace the system when it falls into a position of weakness, not just for our own sakes but for the future of humanity.”[70]

Bibliography
Abensour, Miguel. “An-archy between Metapolitics and Politics.” Parallax 3 (July 2002), 5-18.

———. ‘Savage Democracy’ and ‘Principle of Anarchy’. Philosophy and Social Criticism, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 703-726, November 2002

Aeschylus. Seven against Thebes, trans. H. W. Smyth, Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press, 1926.

Agamben, Giorgio. Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press, 1998.

———. Means Without End: Notes on Politics. Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press, 2000.

Anderson, Travis. “The Anarchy of the Spectacle: Emmanuel Levinas on Separated Subjectivity and the Myth of Gyges.” Graduate Faculty Journal 20/21 (1998): 321-334.

Aristotle. The Basic Works of Aristotle. Ed. Richard McKeon New York: Random House, 1941.

Butler, Judith. Antigone’s Claim. Kinship Between Life and Death. New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 2004.

Chanter, Tina. “Antigone’s Dilemma.” In Re-Reading Levinas, ed. Robert Bernasconi and Simon Critchley. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press, 1991.

Critchley, Simon. “Five Problems in Levinas’s View of Politics and the Sketch of a Solution to Them.” Political Theory: An International Journal of Political Philosophy 32:2 (April 2004), 172-185.

———. The Ethics of Deconstruction: Derrida and Levinas. Lafayette, IN: Purdue Univ. Press, 1999.

———. “Persecution Before Exploitation--A Non-Jewish Israel?” Theory and Event 3.4 (2000): 30-36.

Debord, Guy. The Society of the Spectacle. trans. Ken Knabb. Oakland, CA: AK Press, 2005.

Deleuze, Gilles and Felix Guattari. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Trans. Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press, 1987.

Derrida, Jacques, “Violence and Metaphysics.” In Writing and Difference, trans. Alan Bass. Chicago, Chicago Univ. Press, 1978.

Freud, Sigmund. Civilization and its Discontents. trans. James Strachey. New York: W. W. Norton, 1989.

Gibbs, Robert, Correlations in Rosenzweig and Levinas. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1992.

Guerin, Daniel. No Gods, No Masters: An Anthology of Anarchism. Oakland, CA: AK Press, 2005.

Hegel, G. W. F. Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A. V. Miller. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1977.

Heidegger, Martin. Basic Philosophical Papers. San Francisco: Harper, 1993.

———. Being and Time, trans. John Macquarrie and Edward Robinson. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1962.

———. Pathmarks, ed. by William McNeill . Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1998.

Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Norman Kemp Smith. New York: Macmillan, 1963.

Knabb, Kenneth (ed.) Situationist International Anthology Chicago: Bureau of Public Secrets, 1995. http://www.bopsecrets.org/SI/

Kropotkin, Petr. The Conquest of Bread. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1906. http://dwardmac.pitzer.edu/anarchist_archives/kropotkin/conquest/toc.html.

Levinas, Emmanuel. Basic Philosophical Writings, edited by Adrian Peperzak, Simon Critchley and Robert Bernasconi. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press, 1996.

———. Collected Philosophical Papers, trans. Alphonso Lingis. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1987.

———. Existence and Existents, trans. Alphonso. Lingis. Pittsburgh: Duquesne Univ. Press, 1995.

———. The Levinas Reader, ed. Sean Hand. London: Blackwell, 1989.

———. Nine Talmudic Readings, trans. Annette Aronowicz. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press, 1990.

———. On Escape, trans. Bettina Bergo. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press, 2003.

———. Otherwise than Being or Beyond Essence, trans. by Alphonso Lingis. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1981.

———. “Reflections on the Philosophy of Hitlerism”, trans. Sean Hand. Critical Inquiry 17 (1990): 62-71.

———. Time and the Other, trans. Richard Cohen, Pittsburgh, Duquesne Univ. Press, 1987.

———. Totality and Infinity, trans. Alphonso Lingis, Pittsburgh, Duquesne Univ. Press, 1969.

Levy, Bernard-Henri. Barbarism with a Human Face. San Francisco: Harper 1980.

Llewelyn, John. Emmanuel Levinas: The Genealogy of Ethics. London: Routledge, 1995

Locke, John. The Second Treatise of Civil Government. http://www.constitution.org/jl/2ndtreat.htm

Malatesta, Errico. “Anarchy: A Pamphlet.” http://dwardmac.pitzer.edu/Anarchist_Archives/malatesta/anarchy.html.

Marx, Karl with Frederich Engels. The Marx-Engels Reader, ed. Robert C. Tucker. New York: W. W. Norton, 1978.

Peperak, Adriaan. “Freedom.” International Philosophical Quarterly 11 (September 1971): 341-361.

Perez, Rolando. On An(archy) and Schizoanalysis. New York: Autonomedia, 1990.

Schmitt, Carl. The Concept of the Political, trans George Schwab. Chicago: Univ. Of Chicago Press, 1976.

Schürmann, Reiner. Heidegger on Being and Acting: From Principles and Anarchy. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press,1990.

Sophocles. Antigone, trans. David Greene. Chicago. Univ. of Chicago, 1991.

Vaneigem, Raoul. The Revolution of Everyday Life, trans. Daniel Nicholson-Smith. London: Rebel Press, 1994.

[5]Aristotle, Metaphysics, in The Basic Works of Aristotle, ed. Richard McKeon (New York: Random House, 1941), 1013 a 10-15.

§ 26.

A Levinasian critique of technology would require a meditation on The Turing Test, in which artificial intelligence is assessed by whether a computer’s responses seem human to its interlocutor. In what way does an Other person’s freedom to respond forever transcends the programming of any automated network?

[1] The author would like to acknowledge those whose authorities guided him towards knowledge, without whom this paper would not have been possible. My thanks go to Alphonso Lingis; to Georges Hansel and Simone Levinas; and to Simon Critchley (in a most un-towards manner) and the rest of my teachers at the New School for Social Research: Jacob Blumenfeld, Andreas Kalyvas, Agnes Heller, Jay Bernstein, Dmitri Nulkin, James Dodd, Nancy Fraser, Claudia Barrachi, and Rainer Forst.

[2] The author would like to acknowledge those whose authorities guided him towards knowledge, without whom this paper would not have been possible. My thanks go to Alphonso Lingis; to Georges Hansel and Simone Levinas; and to Simon Critchley (in a most un-towards manner) and the rest of my teachers at the New School for Social Research: Jacob Blumenfeld, Andreas Kalyvas, Agnes Heller, Jay Bernstein, Dmitri Nulkin, James Dodd, Nancy Fraser, Claudia Barrachi, and Rainer Forst.

[3] Simon Critchley, “Levinas’s View of Politics” (Political Theory, 32:2 [2004]), 177.

[4] Emmanuel Levinas, Otherwise than Being or Beyond Essence, trans. Alphonso Lingis (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1981), 99.

[6] Aristotle, Politics, in The Basic Works of Aristotle, 1254 a 12-17.

[7] Aristotle, Politics 1255 b 7-10.

[8] Aristotle, Politics 1259 a 36 – b 16.

[9] Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes, trans. H. W. Smyth, (Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press, 1926), 1035-6.

[10] Sophocles, Antigone, Antigone, trans. David Greene, (Chicago. Univ. of Chicago, 1991), 673.

[11] Carl Schmitt, The Concept of the Political, trans. George Schwab (Chicago: Univ. Of Chicago Press, 1976), 26.

[12] Sophocles, Antigone, 182-187.

[13] Sophocles, Antigone, 202-212.

[14] Sophocles, Antigone, 640-644.

[15] Schmitt, Concept, 27.

[16] Schmitt, Concept, 46.

[17] Sophocles, Antigone, 640-681.

[18] Aeschylus, Seven against Thebes, 1036-1041.

[19] Sophocles, Antigone, 909-913.

[20] Whereas Hegel explicitly refers to Antigone as a figure of filial morality, she may also appear as a hidden character in Levinas’ work. Levinas mentions in Totality and Infinity (trans. Alphonso Lingis, Pittsburgh, Duquesne Univ. Press, 1969) that erotic love can be “seek but a connatural being, a sister soul, present itself as incest.” (254) Even more suggestively, he states in Otherwise than Being “the ego involved in responsibility is me and no one else, me with whom one would have liked to pair up a sister soul, from whom one would require substitution and sacrifice.” (126).

[21] Martin Heidegger, Being and Time, Being and Time, trans. John Macquarrie and Edward Robinson, (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1962), 440:389.

[22] Heidegger, Being, 436/384.

[23] Because gender is such an important problem in Levinas and throughout philosophy, I will use masculine pronouns to discuss human persons and neuter pronouns for abstractions, but will try not to masquerade this issue by alternating with feminine pronouns.

[24] Emmanuel Levinas, “Reflections on the Philosophy of Hitlerism,” trans. Sean Hand, Critical Inquiry 17 [1990]: 62-71), 64.

[25] Levinas, Totality, 65.

[26] Emmanuel Levinas, “Substitution (1968)”, in Emmanuel Levinas, Basic Philosophical Writings, ed. Adrian Peperzak, Simon Critchley and Robert Bernasconi (Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press, 1996), 91.

[27] Petr Kropotkin, The Conquest of Bread (http://dwardmac.pitzer.edu/anarchist_archives/kropotkin/conquest/ch1.html), Chapter 1.

[28] Kropotkin, Conquest.

[29] Levinas, Otherwise, 99.

[30] John Locke, Second Treatise on Government,(http://www.constitution.org/jl/2ndtreat.htm)

[31] Karl Marx, “Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844”, in The Marx-Engels Reader (ed. Robert C. Tucker. New York: W. W. Norton, 1978), 79.

[32] Marx, “Economic,” 78.

[33] Marx, “Economic,” 81.

[34] Levinas, Totality, 141.

[35] Levinas, Totality, 158.

[36] Marx, “Economic,” 77.

[37] Levinas, Totality, 227

[38] Levinas, Totality, 229

[39] Levinas, Totality, 232-233.

[40] Perhaps Levinas’ phenomenology of conversation can be most clearly observed in an internet chat room, in which one party makes a statement, forever etched in memory, but retains the possibility to respond in ways that can not be anticipated.

[41] Levinas, Totality, 129. Alphonso Lingis’ strategy of capitalizing “Other” in his translations unfortunately obscures the relationships between the human Other and the elemental Other.

[42] Levinas, Totality, 66-67. In Otherwise Than Being, Levinas similarly describes responsibility for the Other as something that affects the self anarchically, prior to its own identity “slipping into me like a thief.” (p. 13, 148, 150)

[43] Levinas, Totality, 46.

[44] Levinas, Totality, 294.

[45] Daniel Guerin, No Gods, No Masters : An Anthology of Anarchism, (Oakland, CA; AK Press, 2005), 207.

[46] Levinas, Totality, 120.

[47] Guerin, No Gods, 23.

[48] Guerin, No Gods, 22.

[49] Levinas, “Reflections,” 59.

[50] Guerin, No Gods, 28.

[51] Malatesta, “Anarchy: A Pamphlet” (http://dwardmac.pitzer.edu/Anarchist_Archives/malatesta/anarchy.html).

[52] Malatesta, “Anarchy.”

[53] Malatesta, “Anarchy.”

[54] Levinas, Otherwise, 4.

[55] Emmanuel Levinas, “Humanism and An-archy,” in Collected Philosophical Papers (trans. Alphonso Lingis. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1987),137-138.

[56] Levinas, “Humanism,” 136.

[57] Guerin, No Gods, 151.

[58] Levinas, “Substitution,” 180.

[59] Levinas similarly notes that the Talmud unconditionally requires the burial of unattended corpse, calling it the “mercy of truth.” Emmanuel Levinas, “Ideology and Idealism” (in The Levinas Reader, ed. Sean Hand. London: Blackwell, 1989), 248.

[60] Raoul Vaneigem, Revolution of Everyday Life, trans. Daniel Nicholson-Smith (London: Rebel Press, 1994), 26.

[61] Emmanuel Levinas “No Identity” (in Collected Philosophical Papers), 143.

[62] “May 1968 Graffiti,” (in Knabb, Kenneth [ed.] Situationist International Anthology Chicago: Bureau of Public Secrets, 1995. http://www.bopsecrets.org/CF/graffiti.htm).

[63] Levinas, “Humanism,” 136.

[64] Levinas, “No Identity,” 147.

[65] Levinas, “No Identity,” 151.

[66] Levinas, “Judaism and Revolution” (in Nine Talmudic Readings, trans. Annette Aronowicz. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press, 1990), 102.

[67] Levinas, “Ideology,” 243.

[68] Levinas, “Judaism,” 102.

[69] Levinas, “Judaism,” 107.

[70] “May 1968 Graffiti”.

 
 
 
 
Random | RSS feed | Titles | Authors | Topics | Latest entries | Mobile | Add a new text
theanarchistlibrary.org Ⓐ anarchistnews.org

Levinas identifies the degradation of the worker with the alterity of the other, saying “the economic deprivation of the proletarian – to be sure, his condition as one who is exploited – constitutes this absolute stripping of the other as other.”[67] Alluding to the solidarity between students and workers during May ‘68, Levinas asserts, “To affirm that the working man is not negotiable, that he can not be bargained about, is to affirm that which begins a revolution.”[68]

Whenever people stand up to power, they do so not merely to fight for their own rights or for the politics of their own identities. Instead, they willingly stand in for the other, declaiming the injustice shown unto him. 

 “We must destroy and replace the system when it falls into a position of weakness, not just for our own sakes but for the future of humanity.”

 Denounced as an anarchist in both Aeschylus’s (1991) and Sophocles’ (1994) accounts of her tragedy, [2] Antigone opposes this antagonistic logic in the name of a more ethical mode of human interconnection, one that affirms that we must unconditionally nurture each other, even beyond the moment of death.

 Is the political conception of human sociality sufficient to describe our relationships with each other, and more importantly, should it be the basis for imagining our anarchist future? Part of the problem is that we tend to think of human sociality as being already saturated by politics; that we subscribe either to the Hegelian vision that the state is the transcendental sphere which sustains all other particular affiliations, or to the Foucaultian vision of an immanent micropolitics that determines and disciplines all intimate relationships. But is human existence really so dominated by the political? B

 By submitting to this domination, do we not already foreclose the exploration of other forms of human sociality?

It is important to note that, even in one of the foundational texts of political philosophy, there are already clues that point towards other possibilities. In the first lines of his treatise on Politics, Aristotle declares that the polis (city-state) is only one among several kinds of human koinon (community), another of which is the oikos (home) (1996, 1251b1ff ). Unfortunately, however, the analysis he offers of the home is the prototypically patriarchal one, a definition that has been influential throughout Western history. Not only does Aristotle claim that the home is encompassed within the state, but he also intersects these two communal spheres in the figure of the patriarch, who establishes his dominion over the domestic sphere through a process of domination and domestication, and who establishes the science of oikonomos (economy) to order the household and to acquire property (1996, 1253b1ff). However, Aristotle supplements this patriarchal analysis of the household with a secondary definition. The household is not simply the locus of domination, but more fundamentally, it is the association where people come together to attend to their everyday needs and wants, the communal space where people become companions through the activity of eating together (Arist

Arendt’s correlation of dependency with domination is one of the most problematic and most characteristic aspects of patriarchal thinking. This repudiation of dependency becomes so absurd that many patriarchal thinkers even conceal the fact that we are born unto wome

Are there not different ways of understanding the vulnerability experienced in individual and social life? C

care workers depend on a practical knowledge of the qualities of the material world, including the human bodily world, in which they deal. This means that the material world, seen under the aspect of caring labor, is organized in terms of people’s needs and pleasures and, by extension, of the needs and pleasures of any animal or plant that is instrumental in human caring or is tended for its own sake. (Ruddick, 2006, p. 130)

or example, bell hooks discusses how black women maintained what she calls ‘home place’ as a site of resistance against rampant racism, a refuge where people could gather and heal themselves from the wounds inflicted by a hostile society (2001, pp. 41–9).

The best way to understand Kropotkin’s thinking is to see how much it embraces human vulnerability and how much it insists upon the paramount virtue of nurturance. In his writings on mutual aid, Kropotkin repeatedly articulates the value of human dependency

While it may be true from an outside perspective that all of our social contributions balance each other out, what is important is that, from my own perspective, I realize how indebted I am to the rest of humanity.

Private property is unjust not simply because it fails to recognize the worker’s agency as a producer, but rather because it neglects to accept our infinite dependency as consumers. For this reason, Kropotkin 

All things are for all men, since all men have need of them, since all men have worked in the measure of their strength to produce them, and since it is not possible to evaluate every one’s part in the production of the world’s wealth. T

 the care function of the state allows it to mask the fact that the state exists as the institution that facilitates the domination of the rich and powerful and abets the immiseration of the poor and subjugated.