Très bien
Shabbat shalom 


Le ven. 28 avr. 2023 à 05:46, Mitchell Verter <mitchell.verter@gmail.com> a écrit :
What I have sent so far are notes. I will put these together in a paragraph and send it to you over the weekend. Thanks so much. 

On Thu, Apr 27, 2023, 08:58 joelle hansel <joellehansel123@gmail.com> wrote:
Hi Mitch
Can we consider what you're writing in your mail as your proposal ?
please notice that time slot for the talks is 30 minutes : 20 minutes for the talk and 10 mn for questions 
Best
Joëlle


Le lun. 10 avr. 2023 à 20:29, Mitchell Verter <mitchell.verter@gmail.com> a écrit :
Great.  Thanks so much.  I will figure out travel and lodging on the way.  

Insofar as my talk goes, I am still figuring out the dimensions of it and rereading the texts.  I am not so much interested in the critique of later Heidegger but with the Heraclitean lineage that goes through him to Deleuze and other 60s Nietzshceans, so I will be using a lot from Otherwise than Being.  I would also like to bring in some of Sol's paper in which he attempts to look for an eco phenomenological reading of Levinas.  This is one of the great questions in Levinas -- how does he articulate the relation to the other beings of the natural world, and conversely to technology.  I have some clues about this but I am not sure.  I really like Sol's interpretation of diachrony as ancestry through history. My own research has been about motherhood so it would be great if I could somehow fit in something about the Haudensoaunee society as an exemplar of a Levinasian matri-social. https://ictnews.org/archive/power-haudenosaunee-women

On Mon, Apr 10, 2023 at 2:39 AM joelle hansel <joellehansel123@gmail.com> wrote:
Dear Mitch
It would be a pleasure to have you as a speaker at our conference.
We cannot cover travel and hotel expenses we hope that it's not a problem
Please let us know
Hag sameach!
Joelle 


--
------------------

How can I
......explain
............to you
my state of mind?
The earth
has a whole skyful of lights...
The blue sky,
......a hell of a lot
............of stars.

Vladimir Mayakovsky

