 simplistic[primaire]. But the primitive
powers that burn within it burst open its wretched phraseology under
the pressure of an elementary force

f elementary feelings.

, to intuition, to the original decision that makes
them possible.

'This conception is a feeling that man is absolutely free
in his relations with the world and the possibilities that solicit action
from him. Man is renewed eternally in the face of the Universe. Speak-
ing absolutely,he has no history.

For history is the most profound limitation, the fundamental limi-
tation. Time, which is a condition of human existence, is above all a
condition that is irreparable. The fait accompli, swept along by a
fleeing present, forever evades man's control, but weighs heavily on his
destiny. Beneath the melancholy of the eternal flow of things, Heracli-
tus's illusory present, there lies the tragedy of the irremovabilityof a
past that cannot be erased, and that condemns any initiative to being
just a continuation. True freedom, the true beginning would require a
true present, which, always at the peak of a destiny, forever recom-
mences that destiny.

radical powerlessness to redeem the irreparable-
heralds the repentence that generates the pardon that redeems

 reopen the finality brought about by the flow of
moments of a past that is forever challenged,

Man retains the
possibility-a supernatural possibility,certainly, but also a concrete and
graspable one-of terminating the contract into which he freely entered

the power
of renewal gives the soul a noumenal nature that is protected from the
attacks launched by a world in which concrete man nonetheless is
placed. 

"It is due to the power
given to the soul to free itself from what has been


 autonomy,

 The light of
reason was enough to chase away the shadows of irrationality

Marxism no longer sees the human spirit as pure freedom, or a soul
floating above any attachment.

 It is prey to material needs.

 Individual consciousness determined by
being is not sufficiently impotent not to retain, at least in principle, the
power to shake off the social bewitchment that then appears foreign to
its essence. To become conscious of one's social situation is, even for Marx, to free oneself of the fatalism entailed by that situation. A view that was truly opposed to the European notion of man would be possible only if the situation to which he was bound was not added to him but formed the very foundation of his being. This paradoxical requirement is one that the experience of our bodies seems to
fulfill.

It weighs on
Socrateslike the chains that weigh him down in the prison at Athens; it
encases him like the very tomb that awaitshim. T


 eternal strangeness of the body in relation
to us

Beyond these banal observations, there is the feeling of identity
Do we not affirm ourselves in the warmth of our bodies
 unique

 as Does not thevery beginning desperate? rebelling
spirit remain ineluctably locked within pain? And is it not this despair
that constitutes the very foundation of pain?

 they possess an irreducible and that one wishes to maintain their originality purity.
Physical pain can reveal an absolute position.
The is not a or accident that relates us to
body only happy unhappy the implacable world of matter. Its adherence to the Self is of value in itself
It is an adherence that one does not escape and that no metaphor can confuse with the presence of an external object; it is a union that does not in alter the character ofany way tragic finality.

 the whole of the
spirit's essence lies in the fact that it is chained to the body. T

The importance attributed to this feeling for the body, with which
the Western spirit has never wished to content itself, is at the basis of a new conception of man. T

t. The mysterious urgings of the blood, the appeals of heredity and the past for which the body serves as an enigmatic vehicle,

 Man's essence no longer lies in freedom,
but in a kind of bondage [enchainement

The assimilation of spirits loses the grandeur of the spir-
it's triumph over the body. Instead, it becomes the work of forgers. A society based on consanguinity immediately ensues from this concretization of the spirit. And then, if race does not exist, one has to invent it!

. He is free to the point of
being able not to cross this distance and not to make a choice. Skepti-
cism is a basic possibility for the Western spirit.

 Man can regain control and go back on his choice. Within the
affirmation the future negation is already brewing. T

 It is to a society in such a condition that the Germanic ideal
of man seems to promise sincerity and authenticit

He is already linked to a certain number of these ideas, just as he is linked by birth to all those who are of his blood.

Chained to his body, man sees himself refusing the power to escape
from himself.

? Any rational assimilation
or mystical communion between spirits that is not based on a commu-
nity of blood is suspect. And yet the new type of truth cannot renounce
the formal nature of truth and cease to be universal.

Zarathustra was not content with
his transfiguration; instead he came down from his mountain, bringing
a gospel with him. H

y. Universality
must give way to the idea of expansion, for the expansion of a force presents
a structurethat is completely different from the propagationof an idea.

 The propagation of an idea thus creates a community of
"masters"; it is a process of equalization.


. The person who exerts force does not abandon it. Force does not disappear among those who submit to it. It is attached to the personality or society exerting it, enlarging that person or society while subordinating the rest. Here the universal order is not established as a consequence of ideological expansion; it is that very expansion that constitutes the of a world of masters and slaves. Nietzsche's will to which unity power,modern Germany is rediscovering and glorifying, is not only a new ideal; it is an ideal that simultaneously brings with it its own form of universalization: war and conquest.


We have tried to link
them to a fundamental principle. Perhaps we have succeeded in show-
ing that racism is not just opposed to such and such a particular point in
Christian and liberal culture. 
