30
—the birth and
first formulation, and because its exposition progressively
improves as one advances through its pages written in
haste. Is time the very limitation of finite being or is it the
relationship of finite being to God? 

31
 Know­
ing conceals re-presentation and reduces the other to pres-
enee and co-presence. Time, on the contrary, in itsj
dia-chrony, would signify a relationship that does not com-!
promise the other's alterity, while still assuring its non-!
indifference to "thought."
 

 33
  Its way of signi­
fying, marked by the mystery of death, makes a detour by
entering into the ethical adventure of the relationship to the
other person.

35
 There is
what is said of subjectivity: the mastery of the Ego over be­
ing's anonymous there is, forthwith the reversal of the Self
over the Ego, the encumbrance of the Ego by the self-same
and, thus, a materialist materiality and a solitude of imma­
nence, the irrémissible weight of being in work, pain, and
suffering.

Then there is what is
said of death: not a pure nothingness but an unassumable
mystery and, in this sense, the eventuality

These are theses that have not all been taken up later
in their first form, that since then may have been revealed
as inseparable from more complex and older problems, and
as demanding a less improvised expression and especially
a different thought.

36
 where each one is other than
the other through its individuation). The notion of a tran­
scendent alterity—one that opens time—is at first sought
starting with an alterity-content—that is, starting with femi­
ninity. Femininity—and one would have to see in what
sense this can be said of masculinity or of virility; that is, of
the differences between the sexes in general—appeared to
me as a difference contrasting strongly with other differ-
enees, not merely as a quality different from all others, but
as the very quality of difference

43
 All these relationships are transitive: I touch an ob­
ject, I see the other. But I am not the other. I am all alone. It
is thus the being in me, the fact that I exist, my existing, that
constitutes the absolutely intransitive element, something
without intentionality or relationship.

44
The event by
which the existent contracts its existing I call hypostasis.6

d "Substance and Attribute," by D.J. O'Connor (The Encyclope­
dia of Philosophy, voi. 8, edited by P. Edwards [New York: Macmillan
Publishing Co., 1972], p. 36) may prove helpful: "It is interesting to note
that the principal term for substance in the writings of Aristotle is ousia, a
word which in earlier Greek writers means 'property' in the legal sense of
the word, that which is owned.. . •The Latin word substantia, from which
the English term is derived, is a literal translation of the Greek word hypos-
tasis ("standing under"). 


45
Heidegger distinguishes subjects and objects—the beings
that are, existents—from their very work of being. The first
are expressed by substantives or substantiated participles,
the other by a verb. T

45
9 Existing is always grasped in
the existent, and for the existent that is a human being the
Heideggerian term Jemeinigkeit10 precisely expresses the fact
that existing is always possessed by someone

— Geworfenheit11—"expression of a certain Heideg­
ger," according to Jankelevitch—that is usually translated
"dereliction" or "desertion

2It is as if the
existent appeared only in an existence that precedes it, as
though existence were independent of the existent,

desertion and abandonment. 

 here attempts to think existence independent of
existents—that is, in its separation from the world and others (and God to
the extent that God is an existent). Later in this text—and elsewhere in
other texts—he attempts to think the human being, qua "hypostasis," in
independence, in separation from the world and others (and God)

46
great quote The term "word" is surely upsetting because it is pejorative
nts. Without doubt Jean Wahl would say
that an existing without existents is only a word. The term
"word" is surely upsetting because it is pejorative.

4 What remains after this imagi­
nary destruction of everything is not something, but the
fact that there is [il y a].15

 The there is again appears in Totality and Infinity, where it is
also called "the elemental." 

47
Nietzsche too (and Freud and Marx, in their way) was struck by the im­
personality of being. The "I" for Nietzsche is always the product of a pre­
conscious "it" made up of forces in contention.

47-8
. This in­
determinate ground is already a being [un être]—an entity
[un étant]—a something. It already falls under the category
òf the substantive. It already has that elementary personal­
ity characteristic of every existent. The existing that I am
trying to approach is the very work of being, which cannot
be expressed by a substantive but is verbal. 

 Behind every negation this ambience of being,
this being as a "field of forces," reappears, as the field of
every affirmation and negation. 

 The Heideggerian nothingness still has a
sort of activity and being: "nothingness nothings."21It does
not keep still. 

49
But if it were necessary to compare the notion of the there
is with a great theme of classical philosophy, I would think
of Heraclitus. Not to the myth of the river in which one
cannot bathe twice, but to Cratylus' version of the river in
which one cannot bathe even once;22 where the very fixity
of unity, the form of every existent, cannot be constituted;
the river wherein the last element of fixity, in relation to
which becoming is understood, disappears.

2For Cratylus' version of the Heraclitean river, see Aristotle, Metaphysics,
IV, 1010a 18. For a contemporary discussion of it, see G.S. Kirk, ]. E. Raven,
andM. Schofield, The Presocratic Philosophers, 2nded. (Cambridge Univer­
sity Press, 1983), pp. 195-96. Levinas again refers to Cratylus' river in Total­
ity and Infinity, p. 60


50
This existing without existents, which I call the there isr is
the place where hypostasis will be produced.2

One is no longer master of anything—that is, one is in the
absurd. Suicide appears as the final recourse against the
absurd.241 mean suicide in the broad sense of the term, also
including the despairing yet lucid struggle of a Macbeth,
who fights even when he has recognized the uselessness of
combat.


51
H ypo sta sis


Consciousness is a rupture of the anonymous vigilance of
the there is; it is already hypostasis; it refers to a situation
where an existent is put in touch with its existing. 

52
veritable inversion at the heart of anonymous being.


52
More exactly, the appearance of an existent is the very con­
stitution of a mastery, of a freedom in an existing that by it­
self would remain fundamentally anonymous. In order for
there to be an existent in this anonymous existing, it is nec­
essary that a departure from self and a return to self—that
is, that the very work of identity—become possible.


being and having:   verbalization and nominalization.   
hypostasis 
On the one hand, it is
an event and not yet something; it does not exist; but it is
an event of existing through which something comes to
start out from itself. On the other hand, it is still a pure
event that must be expressed by a verb; and nonetheless
there is a sort of molting in this existing, already a some­
thing, already an existent. 

53
This is precisely because the present is a way of accom-
plishing30 the "starting out from itself" that is always an ev­
anescence.
 One cannot come from oneself otherwise than by re­
ceiving nothing from the past. E


The hypos­
tasis of the present, however, is only one moment of hypos­
tasis; time can indicate another relationship between
existing and the existent. T

As present and "I," hypostasis is freedom. The existent is
master of existing. It exerts on its existence the virile power
of the subject. It has something in its power

It results from the work
of hypostasis. Solitude is the very unity of the existent, the
fact that there is something in existing starting from which
existence occurs. The 

. Solitude is thus
not only a despair and an abandonment, but also a virility,
a pride and a sovereignty.

55
f proud, aristocratic and genial solitude.3
But identity is not only a depar­
ture from self; it is also a return to self

1Levinas develops these analyses of the existent's primordial and irre­
ducible independence and sovereignty in Existence and Existents (pp. 17­
36) and Totality and Infinity (pp.110-14, 117-20, 127-40, 144-51).

56
2 It results from the present as present. 
 anthropological descriptions th

 3 the relationship with a double chained to
the ego, a viscous, heavy, stupid double, but one the ego [le
moi] is with precisely because it is me [moi]. This with is
manifest in the fact that it is necessary to be occupied with
oneself.

 My being doubles with a hav­
ing; I am encumbered by myself.


The freedom of the Ego and its materiality thus go to­
gether. The first freedom resultant from the fact that in
anonymous existing an existent arises, includes as its price
the very finality of the I riveted to itself.



58
matter is the misfortune [malheur] of hypostasi

Materiality and solitude go together.

Everyday life is a preoccupation with salvation.


59
No one will recommend madness as a way of salvation.
The buffoon, the fool of Shakespearean tragedy, is the one
who feels and bespeaks with lucidity the unsubstantiality
of the world and the absurdity of its situations—the one
who is not the principal character of tragedy, the one who
has nothing to overcome. In a world of kings, princes, and
heroes, the fool is the opening through which this world is
swept by drafts of madness; the fool is not the tempest that
extinguishes the lights and tears away the curtains. H


The man condemned to die straightens out his
uniform before his last walk, accepts a final cigarette, and
finds an eloquent word before the salvo.


cohen 35The notion of temporal "ecstasis" is central to all contemporary theo­
ries of time, especially those of Husserl and Heidegger, and their succès-
sors. It expresses the temporal character of the transcendence or the
being-in-the-world of human existence (see note 2, above).

60-1
There is something other than
naivety in the flat denial the masses oppose to the elites
when they are worried more about bread than about anxi­
ety. From this comes the accent of greatness that stirs in a
humanism springing from the economic problem; from
this comes the very power that the demands of the working
class possess to be elevated into a humanism. They would
be inexplicable for a behavior that was to have been simply
a fall into inauthenticity, or likewise a diversion, or even a
legitimate exigency of our animality.

 the need to be saved and the
need to be satisfied—Jacob and Esau

of our animality continually surpassed by spiritual activity.
But neither does the anxiety about salvation arise in suffer­
ing a need that would be its occasional cause, as if poverty
or the proletarian condition were the occasion for glimp­
sing the gate of the Heavenly Kingdom


61-2
Economic struggle is al­
ready on an equal footing with the struggle for salvation
because it is founded in the very dialectic of hypostasis
through which the first freedom is constituted.

we
want both to recognize material life and its triumph over
the anonymity of existing, and the tragic finality to which it
is bound by its very freedom


 The identical subject
does not return to itself immediately

cohen:  and Dasein's "care" (Sorge) for
being-in-the-world as such—that is, its care for itself qua Da-sein. I
 care—Sorge—is etymologically and ontologically at
the root of the other two. The "call of care" draws Dasein from out of its or­
dinary ( = within-the-world) absorption with things and persons to an au­
thentic relationship with itself. It is to this ultimate reflexivity that Levinas
is here alluding. Se


63
 an ensemble of nourishments
 When one smells a flower, it is
the smell that limits the finality of the act. 

 It is absorp­
tion of the object, but also distance with regard to it.
The subject separates from itself.


 The interval of space given by light is instantaneously
absorbed by light

 But it is not right to judge en­joyment in terms of profits and losses. One must view it in its becoming, its event, in relationship to the drama of the ego inscribed in being,
thrown into a dialectic. The entire attraction of earthly nourishments and the entire experience of youth is opposed to Platonic calculation.

 To see is already to render the encountered object one's own, as drawn from one's own ground. In this sense, "tran­scendental constitution" is but a way of seeing in full clarity. It is a compietion of vision.


64-5
9 It does not have a fundamental strange­ness. Its transcendence is wrapped in immanence. The ex­teriority of light does not suffice for the liberation of the ego that is the self's captive.

to take a distance with regard to its material­ity. 


d accomplish its destiny to be the sole
and unique point of reference for everything.
By encompassing everything within its universality, rea­son finds itself once again in solitude. Solipsism is neither Ian aberration nor a sophism; it is the very structure of reason. 


65-6
 The possible reversal of objectivity into subjectivity is the very theme of idealism^

it encoun­ters an event that stops its everyday transcendence from
falling back upon a point that is always the same. 

67
mhis its an the existent. relationship subject The alone, with solitude alone the due of existing the to the subject very over
which it is master. This mastery over existing is the power'
of beginning, of starting out from itself, starting out from
itself neither to act nor to think, but to be.

s an enchainment to self, the
very enchainment of identification. Concretely, the rela­
tionship of identification is the encumbrance of the ego by
the self, the care that the ego takes of itself, or materiality.

The subject is ab­sorbed in the object it absorbs, and nevertheless keeps a distance with regard to that object


The light that permits encountering something other than the self, makes it en­countered as if this thing came from the ego

. In this sense, "the one who works not, eats not" is an analytic proposition.

In pain, sorrow, and suffering, we once again find, in a
state of purity, the finality that constitutes the tragedy of
d I am
going to lay stress on the pain lightly called physical, for in
it engagement in existence is without any equivocation.

 And this is not to define suffering by suffering, but to insist on the sui generis implication that constitutes its essence. In suffering there is an absence of all refuge

 The structure of pain, which consists in its very attachment to
pain, is prolonged further, but up to an unknown that is
impossible to translate into terms of light—

70
that the subject is in re­lationship with what does not come from itself. We could say it is in relationship with mystery.

. Being toward death, in Heidegger's authentic existence, is a supreme lu­cidity and hence a supreme virility. It 

71
 Death is in this sense the limit of idealism

  something absolutely unknowable ap­pears. Absolutely unknowable means foreign to all light, rendering every assumption of possibility impossible, but where we ourselves are seized.



72
This is why death is never a present  Its main

cohen kernel/husk hidden ontological language  "hidden"  what is kernel/husk?
17The earliest published text containing what is perhaps the nascent
kernel of Levinas' thought—hidden within the husks of Heideggerian
ontology—is entitled "De l'évasion"
theme is the escape of the self from its enchainment with itselL 

 but to the fact that death is ungraspable, that it marks the end of the subject's virility and heroism

My mastery, my virility, my heroism as a subject can
\be neither virility nor heroism in relation to death. 

. Where suffering attains its purity,
where there is no longer anything between us and it, the
supreme responsibility of this extreme assumption turns
J into supreme irresponsibility, into infancy. Sobbing is this,
and precisely through this it announces death. To die is to
return to this state of irresponsibility, to be the infantile
shaking of sobbing.

 death approaches.

 Had not the witches predicted that a man of woman born could do
nothing against Macbeth? But here is Macduff, who was not of woman born. Deat

"for it hath cow'd my better
part of man

"Though Birnam Wood be come to Dunsinane, and thou
oppos'd, being of no woman born, yet I will try the last."

 Spiro/spero.49 H

  It is nothingness that
would have left humankind the possibility of assuming
death and snatching a supreme mastery from out of the
servitude of existence. 

74
 Death be­ comes the limit of the subject's virility the virility made possible by the hypostasis at the heart of anonymous be­ing, and manifest in the phenomenon of the present, in the
light. 

 we are no longer able to be able [nous ne 'pouvons plus pouvoir']A It is exactly thus that the subject loses its very mastery as a subject.

 Death is the im­
possibility of having a project. T

My solitude is thus not confirmed by death but broken
by it

75
 Here
the plural is not a multiplicity of existents; it appears in ex­isting itself. A plurality insinuates itself into the very exist­ing of the existent, which until this point was jealously
assumed by the subject alone and manifest through suffer­ing.

 the other is in no way another myself, participating with me in
a common existence.52 

cohen What is common to death
and social life is an encounter with radical alterity.
 and as Levinas says
unequivocally in Totality and Infinity, the encounter with the alterity of
death is like nothing so much as the encounter with the alterity of the
other person, "as though the approach of death remained one of the mo­dalities of the relationship with the Other"

76
The relationship with the other
will never be the feat of grasping a possibility.

77
with the other. The fu­ture is what is in no way grasped. The exteriority of the fu­ture is totally different from spatial exteriority precisely through the fact that the future is absolutely surprising. Anticipation of the future and projection of the future,

78 cohen on bergson d its insertion of newness into being.

77
 an event in death.
And I have contrasted this possibility, where the subject is
no longer master of the event, with the possibility of the
object, which the subject always masters and with which it
is, in short, always alone.

 because it is the very
problem of the preservation of the ego in transcendence

78
 The pathos of sufferingdoes not consist solely in the impossibility of fleeing exist­ing, of being backed up against it, but also in the terror of leaving this relationship of light whose transcendence death announces. 

 we want both to die and to be.

as one welcomes a thing or object, faces up to the event


79

the relationship with the Other is as entirely different from what the existentialists propose as it is from what the Marxists propose

 it must also enter into relationship with the,
present

 It is certainly not a relationship of pure contiguity, which would transform time into space, but nei­ther is it the élan of dynamism and duration, 

The situation of the face-to-face would be the very accomplishment of time; the encroach­ment of the present on the future is not the feat of the sub­ject alone, but the intersubjective relationship,. The condition of time lies in the relationship between humans, or in history

80
When one deprives the present of all anticipation, the fu­ture loses all co-naturalness with it. 

 It is a matter of showing that creation itself pre­supposes an opening onto a mystery. T

81
 and upon the hy­postasis that ends in the mastery of an existent over existing, but which by the same token is shut up within the
finality of the identity that its spatial transcendence does
not undo. It is not a matter of contesting the fact of anticipa­
tion, to

 time is essentially a new birth.

What, then, is this personal relationship other than I
subject's power over the world, meanwhile protecting
personality

82
but one itself founded upon the inner dialectic of the relationship with the Other

for the other what the other is for oneself; there is no excep­tional place for the subject.

alterity appears as a nonreciprocal relationship—that is, as contrasting strongly with contemporaneousness. The Other as Other is not only
an alter ego: the Other is what I myself am not

 the weak, the poor, "the
widow and the orphan,"64 whereas I am the rich or the
powerful.

cohen
It is at the level of the "decency" of "everyday life" then, that Levinas
finds a place for the sympathy and pairing that he has rejected as ulti­mately constitutive of the inter-subjective relationship (see notes 50 and
51, above).
To grasp alterity outside even negativity, and thus in a truly positive "sense," is perhaps the essence of
Levinas' entire effort. See, in particular, the section entitled "Transcen­dence is Not Negativity" in Totality and Infinity, pp. 40-42; and the Preface,
above (p. 32


The relation­ship with alterity is neither spatial nor conceptual?

85
 Is there not a situation where alterity would be borne by a being in a positive sense, as essence? What is the alterity that does not purely and simply enter into the opposition of two species of the same genus?

y other, is the feminine.m
Sex is not some specific difference. It is situated beside
the logical division into genera and species. This division
certainly never manages to reunite an empirical content.
But it is not in this sense that it does not permit one to ac­count for the difference between the sexes. The difference
between the sexes is a formal structure, but one that carves
up reality in another sense and conditions the very possi-
büity of reality as multiple, against the unity of being pro­
claimed by Parmenides.

cohen
De Beauvoir takes Levinas to task for allegedly assigning^־ secbfnJaiy,
derivative status tQ. wo.njep: subject (hePas absolute, womanásóther. The
issue is important but certainly not as simple as de Beauvoir, in this in­
stance, makes it out to be, because for Levinas the other has apriority over
the subject. For


86
Neither is the difference between the sexes the duality of
two complementary terms, for two complementary terms
presuppose a preexisting whole

in an insurmountable
duality of beings.

 I think of the admirably bold pages of Léon
Bloy in his Letters to his Fiancée,711 do not want to ignore the
legitimate claims of the feminism that presupposes all the
acquired attainments of civilization

 Profanation is not a negation of mystery, but one
of the possible relationships with it.

Neither is the difference between the sexes the duality of
two complementary terms, for two complementary terms
presuppose a preexisting whole. To say that sexual duality
presupposes a whole is to posit love beforehand as fusion.70
The pathos of love, however, consists in an insurmountable
duality of beings. It is a relationship
cohen "This is Aristophanes' position in Plato's Symposium.


87
What matters to me in this notion of the feminine is not
merely the unknowable, but a mode of being that consists
in slipping away from the light. T

 The feat of being refractory to our power is not a power
greater than ours.

I do
not initially posit the Other as freedom, a cha


 Hegel has shown
precisely how the master becomes slave of the slave and
the slave becomes master of the master.72

I am not concerned
with an existent, '
 but with the event of alterity, — — —
 with alienation. Th

88
 It is an event in existing different from the hypos­tasis by which an existent arises

 The transcendence of the feminine consists in withdrawing elsewhere, which is a movement opposed to the movement of consciousness.

, with what cannot be there when everything is there—n

The seeking of the caress constitutes its essence by the fact that the caress does not know what it seeks. This "not knowing," this fundamental disorder, is the essential. 

The caress is the anticipation of this pure future [avenir],73 without content.

cohen 73Venir is a verb meaning "to come" or—especially in the construction â
venir—" about to come"; avenir is a noun meaning "future."

90
the future purified
of all content, the very mystery of the future, s

 If one could possess, grasp, and
know the other, it would not be other. Possessing, know­
ing, and grasping are synonyms of power.

 what I
called above the "victory over death." 

91
—that is to say, an
ego that inevitably returns to itself? How can the ego be­
come other to itself? This can happen only in one way:
through paternity.
¿ Paternity is the relationship with a stranger who, entirely
j while being Other, is myself, the relationship of the ego
]with a myself who is nonetheless a stranger to me

posession and essence
I do
not have my child; I am in some way my child. B

The son is an ego, a person. Lastly, the alterity of the son is
not that of an alter ego. P

 Paternity is not simply the renewal of the father in the
son and the father's merger with him, it is also the father's
exteriority in relation to the son, a pluralist existing. 

. Sexuality, paternity,
and death introduce a duality into existence, a duality that
concerns the very existing of each subject. 

92-3
Plato's philos­
ophy, where multiplicity was subordinated to the one, and
where the role of the feminine was thought within the cate­
gories of passivity and activity, and was reduced to matter.
Plato did not grasp the feminine in its specifically erotic no­
tion.

This collectivity necessarily establishes itself around a third
term, which serves as an intermediary. Miteinandersein, too,
remains the collectivity of the "with,"

94
7 I have tried to find the
temporal transcendence of the present toward the mystery
of the future. Th

What one presents as the failure of communication in
love precisely constitutes the positivity of the relationship;
this absence of the other is precisely its presence as other.
