29 ETHICS IS AN OPTICS
 Already of itself ethics is an “optics.” 

29 I DON'T HAVE THE FINAL WORD TEXT CALLS FOR INTERLOCUTORS.  PHILOSOPHY REQUIRES COMMENTARY 
How far we are in this preface from the theme of the work announced
by its first sentence! Already there is question of so many other things,
even in these preliminary lines, which ought to state without detours the
intent of the work undertaken. Philosophical research in any case does
not answer questions like an interview, an oracle, or wisdom. And can
one speak of a book as though one had not written it, as though one were
its first critic? Can one thus undo the inevitable dogmatism that gathers
up and gauges an exposition in pursuit of its theme? I t will appear in
the eyes of the reader, so naturally indifferent to the vicissitudes of this
chase, as a thicket of difficulties where nothing guarantees the presence of
game. W e should like at least to invite him not to be rebuffed by the
aridity of certain pathways, by the labor of the first section, whose
preparatory character is to be emphasized, but in which the horizon of
this whole research takes form.


36 perspectivism.  
a term can remian absolutely at the point of departure of relationship only as I
T he alterity, the radical heterogeneity nf the other, is possible only if
the other is other with respect to a term whose essence is to remain at the
point of departure, to serve as entry into the relation, to be the same not
relatively but absolutely. A term can remain absolutely at the point of
departure of relationship only as I.
T o be I is, over and beyond any individuation that can be derived from
a system of references, to have identity as one’s content. T he I is not a
being that always remains the same, but is the being whose existing
consists in identifying itself, in recovering its identity throughout all that
happens to it. I t is the primal identity, the primordial work of identifi­
cation.

36 SELF PERSISTENCE (LOCKE-KANT)
T h e I is identical in its very alterations. I t represents them to itself
and thinks them. T he universal identity in which the heterogenous can
be embraced has the ossature of a subject, of the first person. Universal
thought is an “I think.”


38 OPPOSITION WITHIN THE SAME 
T he metaphysical relation can not be properly speaking a representa­
tion, for the other would therein dissolve into the same: every representa­
tion is essentially interpretable as a transcendental constitution. The
other with which the metaphysician is in relationship and which he
recognizes as other is not simply in another locality; this other recalls
Plato’s Ideas which, according to Aristotle’s formula, are not in a site.

40 Alterity is possible only starting from me

50-51 FACE OF OTHER DEFINED AS EXCESS
. But Desire and goodness concretely
presuppose a relationship in which the Desirable arrests the “negativity”
of the I that holds sway in the Same— puts an end to power and emprise.
This is positively produced as the possession of a world I can bestow as a
gift on the Other— that is, as a presence before a face. For the presence
before a face, my orientation toward the Other, can lose the avidity
proper to the gaze only by turning into generosity, incapable of approach­
ing the other with empty hands. This relationship established over the
things henceforth possibly common, that is, susceptible of being said, is
the relationship of conversation. T he way in which the other presents
himself, exceeding the idea of the other in me, we here name face. This
mode does not consist in figuring as a theme under my gaze, in spreading
itself forth as a set of qualities forming an image. T he face of the •
Other at each moment destroys and overflows the plastic image it leaves
me, the idea existing to my own measure and to the measure of its
ideatum— the adequate idea. It does not manifest itself by these
qualities, but icad'aM. I t expresses itself. T he face brings a notion
of truth which, in contradistinction to contemporary ontology, is not the
disclosure of an impersonal Neuter, but expression: the existent breaks
through all the envelopings and generalities of Being to spread out in
its “form” the totality of its “content,” finally abolishing the distinc­
tion between form and content. This is not achieved by some sort of
modification of the knowledge that thematizes, but precisely by “themat-
ization” turning into conversation. 

51 MAEIUTICS
Other at each moment destroys and overflows the plastic image it leaves
me, the idea existing to my own measure and to the measure of its
ideatum— the adequate idea. It does not manifest itself by these
qualities, but icad'aM. I t expresses itself. T he face brings a notion
of truth which, in contradistinction to contemporary ontology, is not the
disclosure of an impersonal Neuter, but expression: the existent breaks
through all the envelopings and generalities of Being to spread out in
its “form” the totality of its “content,” finally abolishing the distinc­
tion between form and content. This is not achieved by some sort of
modification of the knowledge that thematizes, but precisely by “themat-
ization” turning into conversation. 


52 ECONOMIC EXISTENCE
 to which man, escaping from here, would gain access in the privi­
leged moments of liturgical, mystical elevation, or in dying—and a
philosophy of immanence in which we would truly come into possession of
being when every “other” (cause for w ar), encompassed by the same,
would vanish at the end of history—we propose to describe, within the
unfolding of terrestrial existence, of economic existence (as we shall call
it), a relationship with the other that does not result in a divine or
human totality, that is not a totalization of history but the idea of infinity.
Such a relationship is metaphysics itself. History would not be the
privileged plane where Being disengaged from the particularism of
points of view (with which reflection would still be affected) is mani­
fested. If it claims to integrate myself and the other within an imper­
sonal spirit this alleged integration is cruelty and injustice, that is, ignores
the Other. His


53 PERSPECTIVISM 
 This moral experience, so commonplace, indicates a metaphysical
asymmetry: the radical impossibility of seeing oneself from the outside
and of speaking in the same sense of oneself and of the others, and
consequently the impossibility of totalization— and, on the plane of social
experience, the impossibility of forgetting the intersubjective experience
that leads to that social experience and endows it with meaning (as, to
believe the phenomenologists, perception, impossible to conjure away,
endows scientific experience with meaning)

54  SEPARATION OF MOMENT  
LEVINAS DESCRIBES TWO TYPES OF SEPARATIONS OF MOMENT: FROM MOMENT TO MOMENT.  WITHIN EACH MOMENT
But the discovery of this meta­
physical relation in the cogito constitutes chronologically only the second
move of the philosopher. T h at there could be a chronological order
distinct from the “logical” order, that there could be several moments
in the progression, that there is a progression—here is separation. For
by virtue of time this being is not yet—which does not make it the

54 ILLUSION IS A POSITIVE EVENT 
hermeneutics, illusion, neitzsche, gadamer, heidegger.
illusion metaphor is a positive event

54  FIRST MOMENT, SECOND MOMENT  
nt. T he posteriority of the anterior— an in­
version logically absurd— is produced, one would say, only by memory
or by thought. But the “improbafalclL phenomenon of memory or of
thought must precisely be interpreted as a revolution in being. Thus
already theoretical thought—but in virtue of a still more profound
structure that sustains it, the psychism— articulates separation. Separa­
tion is not reflected in thought, but produced by it. For in it the A fter or
the Effect conditions the Before or the Cause: the Before appears and
is only welcomed. 

54 EXTREME YOUTH
an instant, the space of a cogito. T h at there could
be this instant of sheer youth, heedless of its slipping into the past and
of its recovered self-possession in the future (and that this uprooting
be necessary if the I of the cogito is to cling to the absolute),

55 BIRTH AS SURVIVOR OF DEATH
eparation.
T he being that thinks at first seems to present itself, to a gaze that
conceives it, as integrated into a whole. In reality it is so integrated only
once it is dead. Life permits it an as-for-me, a leave of absence, a
postponement, which precisely is interiority. Totalization is accom­
plished only in history—in the history of the historiographers, that is,
among the survivors. I t rests on the affirmation and the conviction
that the chronological order of the history of the historians outlines the
plot of being in itself, analogous to nature. T he time of universal
history remains as the ontological ground in which particular existences
are lost, are computed, and in which at least their essences are recapitu­
lated. Birth and death as punctual moments, and the interval that
separates them, are lodged in this universal time of the historian, who is a
survivor. Interiority as such is a “nothing,” “pure thought,” nothing
but thought. In the time of the historiographer interiority is the non-
being in which everything is possible, for in it nothing is impossible— the
"everything is possible” of madness. This possibility is not an essence,
that is, is not the possibility of a being. But for there to be a separated
being, for the totalization of history to not be the ultimate schema of
being, it is necessary that death which for the survivor is an end be not
only this end; it is necessary that there be in dying another direction than
that which leads to the end as to a point of impact in the duration of
survivors. Separation designates the possibility of an existent being set
up and having its own destiny to itself, that is, being born and dying
without the place of this birth and this death in the time of universal
history being the measure of its reality. Interiority is the very possibility
of a birth and a death that do not derive their meaning from history.
Interiority institutes an order different from historical time in which
totality is constituted, an order where everything is pending, wher

56 MEMORY AS REMEMBRANCE REBIRTH
psychism.
Memory recaptures and reverses and suspends what is already accom­plished in birth — in nature. Fecundity escapes the punctual instant of
death. 

56 RESURRECTION
In the totality of the historiographer the death of the other is an end, the point at which the separated being is cast into the totality, and at which, consequently, dying can be passed through and past, the point from which the separated being will continue by virtue of the heritage his existence had amassed. But the psychism extracts an existence resistant
to a fate that would consist in becoming “nothing but past” ; interiority is the refusal to be transformed into a pure loss figuring in an alien accounting system. T he death agony is precisely in this impossibility
of ceasing, in the ambiguity of a time that has run out and of a
mysterious time that yet remains; death is consequently not reduci­ble to the end of a being. W hat “still remains” is totally different from
the future that one welcomes, that one projects forth and in a certain
measure draws from oneself. For a being to whom everything happens
in conformity with projects, death is an absolute event, absolutely a
posteriori, open to no power, not even to negation. Dying is agony
because in dying a being does not come to an end while coming to an
end; he has no more time, that is, can no longer wend his way
anywhere, but thus he goes where one cannot go, suffocates—how much
longer. . . . T he non-reference to the common time of history means
that mortal existence unfolds in a dimension that does not run parallel to
the time of history and is not situated with respect to this time as to an
absolute. This is why the life between birth and death is neither folly
nor absurdity nor flight nor cowardice. It flows on in a dimension of its
own where it has meaning, and where a triumph over death can have
meaning. T his triumph is not a new possibility offered after the end of
every possibility—but a resurrection in the son in whom the


58 DEAD TIME 
T he interval is not to life what potency is to act. Its originality

consists in being between two times. W e propose to call this dimension
dead time. T

67 BURGLARY 
interiority as though by burglary; the other is surprised in his intimacy,
where, like the personages of history, he is, to be sure, exposed, but does
not express himself.7 W orks signify their author, but indirectly, in the
third person.

68 RELIGION
dividuals or objects; I relate to the Other who is not simply a part
of a Whole, nor a singular instance of a concept. T o reach the Other
through the social is to reach him through the religious. Durkheim thus
gives an indication of a transcendence othe


69 MASTERY 
g. It brings what the written word
is already deprived o f: mastery. Speech, better than a simple sign, is es­
sentially magisterial. I t first of all teaches this teaching itself, by virtue
of which alone it can teach (and not, like maieutics, awaken in me)
things and ideas. Ideas instruct me coming from the master who pre­
sents them to me: who puts them in question;


74 GROTESQUE:  WASTE, NUDITY, UGLINESS
They are always in some respect like those
industrial cities where everything is adapted to a goal of production, but
which, full of smoke, full of wastes and sadness, exist also for themselves.
For a thing nudity is the surplus of its being over its finality. I t is its
absurdity, its uselessness, which itself appears only relative to the form
against which it contrasts and of which it is deficient. T he thing is
always an opacity, a resistance, a ugliness. T

74 BEAUTY 
Beauty then introduces a new finality, an internal finality, into this
naked world. T

76 PERSPECTIVISM:  PERVERSTION GROTESQUE RABELASIAN
“La nudit£ du visage est d£nument.”
freedom presents itself as the other to the same.  destitution
an. The
strangeness that is freedom is also strangeness-destitution [etrangete-
misere]. Freedom presents itself as the other to the same, who is always
the autochthon of being, always privileged in his own residence. T he
other, the free one, is also the stranger. T he nakedness of his face
extends into the nakedness of the body that is cold and that is ashamed of
its nakedness. Existence ko B'cl M is, in the world, a destitution. There
is here a relation between me and the other beyond rhetoric.

78 ORPHAN
>His very epiph­
any consists in soliciting us by his destitution in the face of the Stranger,
the widow, and the orphan. 

78 RElationship WITH MAN 
here can be no “knowledge” of God separated
from the relationship with men. T he Other is the very locus of meta­
physical truth, and is indispensable for my relation with God

79 ETHICAL VS SACRED
T he ethical relation is defined, in contrast with
every relation with the sacred, by excluding every signification it would
take on unbeknown to him who maintains that relation. W

83 DISCOVERY 
This self-criticism can be understood as a discovery of one’s weakness
or a discovery of one’s unworthiness— either as a consciousness of
failure or as a consciousness of guilt. In the latter case to justify
freedom is not to prove it but to render it just.

84 shame freedom discovers itself murderous
mencement of moral
consciousness, which calls in question my freedom. Thus this way of
measuring oneself against the perfection of infinity is not a theoretical
consideration; it is accomplished as shame, where freedom discovers itself
murderous in its very exercise. I t is accomplished in shame where
freedom at the same time is discovered in the consciousness of shame and
is concealed in the shame itself. Shame does not have the structure of
consciousness and clarity. I t is oriented in the inverse direction; its
subject is exterior to me. Discourse an

86 PERSPECTIVISM 
 T he Other measures me with a
gaze incomparable to the gaze by which I discover him. T he dimension
of height in which the O ther is placed is as it were the primary curvature
of being from which the privilege of the Other results, the gradient

87 FREEDOM AS IMPERIALISM 
imperialism of the same 
will to live 
s. T he
relationship with the Other does not move (as does cognition) into
enjoyment and possession, into freedom; the O ther imposes himself as an
exigency that dominates this freedom, and hence as more primordial than
everything that takes place in me.


90 GYGES PERSPECTIVISM
But does not Gyges’s position involve the impunity of a being alone in
the world, that is, a being for whom the world is a spectacle ? And is not
this the very condition for solitary, and hence uncontested and unpun­
ished, freedom, and for certitude?

91-2 WITCHES EVIL GENIUS PARODY LAUGHTER 
. It is the inverse of language:
the interlocutor has given a sign, but has declined every interpretation;
this is the silence that terrifies. 
 T he evil genius’ lie is beyond every lie; in
the ordinary lie the speaker dissimulates himself, to be sure, but in the
dissimulating word does not evade speech, and hence can be refuted.
The inverse of language is like a laughter that seeks to destroy language,
a laughter infinitely reverberated where mystification interlocks in mysti­
fication without ever resting on a real speech, without ever commencing.
T he spectacle of the silent world of facts is bewitched: every phenome-
non masks, mystifies ad infinitum, making actuality impossible. I t is the
situation created by those derisive beings communicating across a laby­
rinth of innuendos which Shakespeare and Goethe have appear in their
scenes of sorcerers where speech is antilanguage and where to respond
would be to cover oneself with riditule.

 T o have meaning is to teach or to be
taught, to speak or to be able to be stated


99 PREGNANCY
As an attendance of being at its own presence, speech is a teaching.
Teaching does not simply transmit an abstract and general content
already common to me and the Other. It does not merely assume an
after all subsidiary function of being midwife to a mind already pregnant
with its fruit. Speech first founds community by giving, by presenting
the phenomenon as given; and it gives by thematizing. T h

99 ANARCHIC SORCERY 
. T he presence of the
Other dispels the anarchic sorcery of the facts: the world becomes an
object. T o be an object, to

100 MASTERY 
that accomplishes freedom and does not offend it: the exteriority of the
Master. Thought can become explicit only among tw o; explicitation is
not limited to finding what one already possessed. But the first teaching
of the teacher is his very presence as teacher from which representation
comes.

100  RIGOR MORTIS SELF REFLECTION  
 T he calling in question of oneself
is all the more severe the more rigorously the self is in control of itself.

101 LORDSHIP
 T he interlocutor is not a Thou, he is a You;* he
reveals himself in his lordship. Thus exteriority coincides with a mas­
tery. M y freedom is thus challenged by a Master who can invest it.
T ruth, the sovereign exercise of freedom, becomes henceforth possible.

110 ABSOLVE SEPARATION ABSOLUTE AB- 
In the case of separation the union of the terms maintains separation in
an eminent sense. T he being that is in relation absolves itself from the
relation, is absolute within relationship. Its concrete analysis as it is
undertaken by a being who accomplishes it (


111 NURSING NOURISHMENT 
 Nourishment, as a
means of invigoration, is the transmutation of the other into the same,
which is in the essence of enjoyment: an energy that is other, recognized
as other, recognized, we will see, as sustaining the very act that is
directed upon it, becomes, in enjoyment, my own energy, my strength,
me. All enjoyment is in this sense alimentation. Hunger is need, is
privation in the primal sense of the word, and thus precisely living
from . . . is not a simple becoming conscious of what fills life. These
contents are lived: they feed life. One lives one’s life: to live is a sort of
transitive verb, and the contents of life are its direct objects. And the
act of living these contents is ipso facjo a content of life. T he 

112 VALUE 
 Its essence makes up its worth
[prix] ; and here value [valeur] constitutes being. 

113 SECOND POWER 
 In
enjoyment we maintain ourselves always at the second power, which,
however, is not yet the level of reflection. For happiness, in which we
move already by the simple fact of living, is always beyond being, in
which the things are hewn. I t is an outcome

114 MASTERY AND DEPENDENCE 
T he paradox of “living from some­
thing,” or, as Plato would say, the folly of these pleasures, is precisely
in a complacency with regard to what life depends on—not a mastery
on the one hand and a dependence on the other, but a mastery in this
dependence. 

116 SCABIES PEMA CHODRON
T he essence of need would be
visible in the need to scratch oneself in scabies, in sickness.* M ust we
remain at a philosophy of need that apprehends it in poverty ? Poverty is
one of the dangers the liberation of man breaking with the animal and
vegetable condition risks. In need the essential is in this rupture, despite
this risk. 

116 NEEDS DOWNCAST
 T o be cold, hungry,
thirsty, naked, to seek shelter— all . iese dependencies with regard to the
world, having become needs, save the instinctive being from anonymous
menaces and constitute a being independent of the world, a veritable
subject capable of ensuring the satisfaction of its needs, which are recog­
nized as material, that is, as admitting of satisfaction.

117 ERECTION HEIGHT 
Desire. Labor,
however, already requires discourse and consequently the height of the
other irreducible to the same, the presence of the Other. There is no nat­
ural religion; but already human egoism leaves pure nature by virtue
of the human body raised upwards, committed in the direction of height.
This is not its empirical illusion but its ontological production and its
ineffaceable testimony. The “I can” proceeds from this height.

118 REFUSAL 
 T he refusal of the
concept is not a resistance to generalization by the r65e n , which is on the
same plane of the concept—and by which the concept is defined, as by an
antithetical term. H

118 KILLING FOR A PIECE OF BREAD
. I t is for itself as in the
expression “each for himself” ; for itself as the “famished stomach that
has no ears,” capable of killing for a crust of bread, is for itself; for itself
as the surfeited one who does not understand the starving and approaches
him as an alien species, as the philanthropist approaches the destitute


118-9 PLEAD FOR ENJOYMENT FOR NEEDS 
It is precisely as a “coiling,” as
a movement toward oneself, that enjoyment comes into play. And now
one can understand in w hat sense we were able to say above that the I is
an apology: whatever be the transfigurations this egoism will receive from
speech, it is for the happiness constitutive of its very egoism that the I
who speaks pleads.

120 BEYOND BEING 
T o be I is to exist in such a way as to be already beyond being, in
happiness. For the I to be means neither to oppose nor to represent
something to itself, nor to use something, nor to aspire to something, but
to enjoy something.

120 FOOTNOTE SCHILLING
 To the end the person—even the person of the
leader—remains at the service of life and of the creation of life. 


120-1 PERSPECTIVISM
In order that multiplicity be maintained, the relation proceeding from me
to the Other— the attitude of one person with regard to another—must
be stronger than the formal signification of conjunction, to which every
relation risks being degraded. This greater force is concretely affirmed
in the fact that the relation proceeding from me to the other cann

121 DEPTH 
 In order that a pluralism in itself (which cannot be
reflected in formal logic) be realized there must be produced in depth
the movement from me to the other, an attitude of an I with re­
gard to the Other (an attitude already specified as love or hatred,
obedience or command, learning or teaching, etc. . . .)

121 CONFRONT OTHERS FROM  MY PERSPECTIVE
Pluralism implies a radical alterity of the other, whom I do not simply
conceive by relation to myself, but confront out of my egoism. 

121 PERSPECTIVISM
 T he O ther as master
can also serve us as an example of an alterity that is not only by relation
to me, an alterity that, belonging to the essence of the other, is neverthe­
less visible only from an I

123 
h enjoyment in dwelling and in possession.1 

123-4 MASTERY 
Intelligibility, characterized by clarity, is a total adequation of the
thinker with what is thought, in the precise sense of a mastery exercised
by the thinker upon what is thought in which the object’s resistance as an
exterior being vanishes. This mastery is total and as though creative;
it is accomplished as a giving of meaning: the object of representation is
reducible to noemata.


126 UPROOTED, REFLECTION 
And its marvelous work of
constitution is especially possible in reflection. I t is the “uprooted”
representation that we have analyzed. T h

126 
 This inspiration [genialite] is the
very structure of representation: a return in the present thought to the
thought’s past, an assuming of this past in the present, a going beyond
this past and this present— as in the Platonic reminiscence, in which
the subject hoists him self up to the eternal

126 DETACHED FROM LATENT BIRTH 
 The idealist creation is representation.
But this is true only of the I proper to representation— detached from
the conditions of its latent birth. 


127  BODY HIGH AND LOW -- HEIGHT AND WEIGHT, DEPTH DOWNWARDS
 T he body is the elevation, but
also the whole weight of position. T he body naked and indigent identi­
fies the center of the world it perceives, but, conditioned by its own
representation of the world, it is thereby as it were torn up from the
center from which it proceeded, as water gushing forth from rock
washes away that rock. T he body indigent and naked is not a thing
among things which I “constitute” or see in God to be in a relation with
a thought, nor is it the instrument of a gestural thought, of which theory
would be simply the ultimate development. T h e body naked and indi­
gent is the very reverting, irreducible to a thought, of representation into
life, of the subjectivity that represents into life which is sustained by these
representations and lives of them; its indigence— its needs— affirm “exte­
riority” as non-constituted, prior to all affirmation.

128 POSITION 
 T o posit oneself corporeally is to touch an earth, but to do so in such
a way that the touching finds itself already conditioned by the position,
the foot settles into a real which this very action outlines or constitutes— ,

129 BECOME ME 
T o be sure, in the
satisfaction of need the alienness of the world that founds me loses its
alterity: in satiety the real I sank my teeth into is assimilated, the forces
that were in the other become my forces, become me 

129 HAVING, OWNING, EXTERIOR BECOMES Interiority
 T he world I constitute nourishes me and
bathes me. It is aliment and “medium” [“milieu” ]. T he intentionality
aiming at the exterior changes direction in the course of its very aim by
becoming interior to the exteriority it constitutes, somehow comes from
the point to which it goes, recognizing itself past in its future, lives from
what it thinks.

129 NAKED BODY 
 T he body indigent and naked is this very changing

131 PLATO NAVIGATOR GUARDIAN WATER 
T he navigator who
 makes
 use of the sea and the wind dominates these
plato guardian
 aselements but does navigator
 not thereby transform them into things


 131 LE FACE VS LE VISAGE LINGIS FUCKS UPROOTED
  O r rather it has but a
side: the surface of the sea and of the field, the edge of the w ind; the
medium upon which this side** takes form is not composed of things.
** “Face”—it is in order to reserve the English word “face” to translate
“visage”—the countenance of the Other—that we are using the term “side” to
translate “face” in this context.—Trans.

132
 T he element as it were stops up the
infinite by relation to which it should have had to have been thought, and
by relation to which scientific thought, which has received from else­
where the idea of infinity, does in fact situate it. T he element separates
us from the infinite

133 BATAILLE 
 T o enjoy
without utility, in pure loss, gratuitously, without referring to anything
else, in pure expenditure— this is the human


135  PULSATION, RHTHYMIC CREATION  JAMES
 T he sensibility we
are describing starting with enjoyment of the element does not belong
to the order of thought but to that of sentiment, that is, the affectivity
wherein the egoism of the I pulsates. One does not know, one lives
sensible qualities: the green of these leaves, the red of this sunset. Ob­
jects content me in their finitude, without appearing to me on a ground
of infinity. T he finite without the infinite is possible only as content­
ment. T he finite as contentment is sensibility

136 ABSURDITY MATERIALITY 
ly, the independence of the “matter”
of cognition with regard to the synthetic power of representation. In
postulating things in themselves so as to avoid the absurdity of ap­
paritions without there being anything that is appearing, Kant does in­
deed go beyond the phenomenology of the sensible. But at least he does
recognize thereby that of itself the sensible is an apparition without
there being anything that appears.

137 RECOLLECTING 
e by recollecting [se recueillant] in a dwelling.

138 EARTH UPHOLDS ME 
 T he earth which
upholds me does so without my troubling myself about knowing what
upholds the earth. 

139-40 STANDING 
 This relation of myself with myself is
accomplished when I stand [me tiensj* in the world which precedes me
as an absolute of an unrepresentable antiquity. 
 T o be sure, I cannot think the horizon in which I find myself to be an absolute, but I stand in
it as in an absolute. Standing there is precisely different from “think­
ing.” T he bit of earth that supports me is not only my object; it
supports my experience of objects. Well-trampled places do not resist
me but support me. T he relation with my site in this “stance”
[“tenue”] precedes thought and labor. T he body, position, the fact of
standing—patterns of the primary relation with myself, of my coinci­
dence with myself— nowise resemble idealist representation

139
 Over and above enjoyment
—with dwelling, possession, the making common— a discourse about the
world takes form. Appropriation and representation add a new event to
enjoyment. 

140 ABSURD GEWORFEN 
m. T he human
being does not find himself in an absurd world in which he would be
geworfen. And this is true absolutely. 

141 NIHILISM POSSESSION 
 This
coming from nowhere, from “something” that is not, appearing with­
out there being anything that appears— and consequently coming always,
without my being able to possess the source— delineates the future of
sensibility and enjoyment. T

142 VISAGE/FACE 
This coming forth from nowhere opposes the element to what we will
describe under the name of face [visage], where precisely an existent
presents itself personally. T o be affected by a side [face] of being while
its whole depth remains undetermined and comes upon me from nowhere
is to be bent toward the insecurity of the morrow. T he future of the
element as insecurity is lived concretely as the mythical divinity of the
element. Faceless gods, impersonal gods to whom one does not speak,
mark the nothingness that bounds the egoism of enjoyment in the midst
of its familiarity with the element. 

142 PAGAN 
This way of existing without revealing itself,
outside of being and the world, must be called mythical. T he nocturnal
prolongation of the element is the reign of mythical gods

142 STRANGENESS 
 Enjoyment, as
interiorization, runs up against the very strangeness of the earth.

143  ENROOTED IN NOTHINGNESS 
Autochthonous, that is, enrooted in what it is not, it is
nevertheless, within this enrootedness, independent and separated. 

145 AFTER THE DELUGE "WATER WATER" 
“after us the deluge.”
 An instant or a standstill, it is the success of the carpe diem, the sovereignty of the “after us the deluge.” 

146 MACBETH 
 whence Macbeth’s final cry in con­
fronting death, defeated because the universe is not destroyed at the same
time as his life. Su

146-7 MARX ABSURDISM 
d. T he limit case in which need
prevails over enjoyment, the proletarian condition condemning to ac­
cursed labor in which the indigence of corporeal existence finds neither refuge nor leisure at home with itself, is the absurd world of Geworfen-
heit.

148 INTERIORITY ECONOMY  
T he inferior­
ity of enjoyment is separation in itself, is the mode according to which
such an event as separation can be produced in the economy of being.

148 BORN 
Enjoyment is the very production of a being that is born, that breaks the
tranquil eternity of its seminal or uterine existence to enclose itself in a
person, who in living from the world lives at home with itself

 This libera­
tion flashes in the light of happiness, in separation. Its free flight and
its grace are felt— and are produced— as the very ease of good time. I t is 
freedom referring to happiness, made of happiness, and consequently
compatible with a being that is not causa sui, that is created.


149 interiortiy holowed out birth canal
n. But on the other
hand within the very interiority hollowed out by enjoyment there must
be produced a heteronomy that incites to another destiny than this animal
complacency in oneself. I

149 inverting 
without inverting the movement of interiorization,

But thus in interiority a dimension opens through which it will be able
to await and welcome the revelation of transcendence. In the concern
for the morrow there dawns the primordial phenomenon of the essen­
tially uncertain future of sensibility. In order that this future arise
in its signification as a postponement and a delay in which labor, by
mastering the uncertainty of the future and its insecurity and by estab­
lishing possession, delineates separation in the form of economic inde­
pendence, the separated being must be able to recollect itself [se recueil-
lir] and have representations. Recollection and representation are pro­
duced concretely as habitation in a dwelling or a Home. But the
interiority of the home is made of extraterritoriality in the midst of the
elements of enjoyment with which life is nourished. This extraterrito­
riality has a positive side. It is produced in the gentleness [douceur] or
the warmth of intimacy, which is not a subjective state of mind, but an
event in the oecumenia of being— a delightful “lapse” of the ontological
order. By virtue of its intentional structure gentleness comes to the
separated being from the Other. T he Other precisely reveals himself in
his alterity not in a shock negating the I, but as the primordial phenome­
non of gentleness.


150 feminine non dialectical 
T he whole of this work aims to show a relation with the other not only
cutting across the logic of contradiction, where the other of A is the
non-A, the negation of A, but also across dialectical logic, where the same
dialectically participates in and is reconciled with the other in the Unity
of the system. T he welcoming of the face is peaceable from the first, for
it answers to the unquenchable Desire for Infinity. W a r itself is but a
possibility and nowise a condition for it. This peaceable welcome is
produced primordially in the gentleness of the feminine face, 

151
only require a
separated being; the light of the face is necessary for separation. But
in founding the intimacy of the home the idea of infinity provokes
separation not by some force of opposition and dialectical evocation, but
by the feminine grace of its radiance. T he 


152 enemies 
 I t serves to shelter him from the inclemencies of the weather, to
hide him from enemies or the importunate. A


152 commencement
 The privi­
leged role of the home does not consist in being the end of human
activity but in being its condition, and in this sense its commencemen

153
 But this civilization refers to the incarnation of
consciousness and to inhabitation—to existence proceeding from the inti­
macy of a home, the first concretization. 

153
 But the
dwelling cannot be forgotten among the conditions for representation,
even if representation is a privileged conditioned, absorbing its condition.
For it absorbs it only after the event, a posteriori. 

154
Recollection, in the current sense of the term, designates a suspension
of the immediate reactions the world solicits in view of a greater
attention to oneself, one’s possibilities, and the situation. 

155 familiarity
 familiarity and intimacy are produced as a gentleness
that spreads over the face of things. T

155 WOMAN 
And the other whose presence is
discreetly an absence, with which is accomplished the primary hospitable
welcome which describes the field of intimacy, is the Woman. T he
woman is the condition for recollection, the interiority of the Home,
and inhabitatio

156 WOMAN FELINE 
tial possibility. Those silent comings and
goings of the feminine being whose footsteps reverberate the secret depths
of being are not the turbid mystery of the animal and feline presence
whose strange ambiguity Baudelaire likes to evoke.

156
 But separation does not isolate me, as though I were
simply extracted from these elements. I t makes labor and property pos­
sible

156
T he ambiguity of distance, both removal and connection, is lifted
by the window that makes possible a look that dominates, a look of him
who escapes looks, the look that contemplates. 


157 prendre
emprise 

157
W ith the dwelling the latent birth of the world is produced.

157
 T he labor that draws the things
from the elements in which I am steeped discovers durable substances,
but forthwith suspends the independence of their durable being by
acquiring them as movable goods,* transportable, put in reserve, depos­
ited in the home

158
home in fact presupposes a woman ? T he feminine has been encountered
in this analysis as one of the cardinal points of the horizon in which the
inner life takes place— and the empirical absence of the human being of
“feminine sex” in a dwelling nowise affects the dimension of femininity
which remains open there, as the very welcome of the dwelling.

158
s possessive
grasp suspends the independence of the element: its being. The thing
evinces this hold or this comprehension— this ontology. Possession neu­
tralizes this being: as property the thing is an existent that has lost its
being. But in this suspension possession com-prehends the being of the
existent, and only thus does the thing arise. Ontology is a relation with
things which manifests things; the ontology that grasps the being of the
existent is a spontaneous and pretheoretical work of every inhabitant of
the earth. Possession masters, suspends, postpones the unforeseeable
future of the element— its independence, its being

159
 T o suspend this independence of
being, this materiality of the elemental non-I, by possession does not
amount to thinking this suspension or obtaining it by the effect of a
formula. T he way of access to the fathomless obscurity of matter is not
an idea of infinity, but labor. Possession is accomplished in taking-pos­
session or labor, the destiny of the hand. 

159
 T he hand’s rigorously economic movement
of seizure and acquisition is dissimulated by the traces, “wastes,” and
“works” this movement of acquisition, returning to the interiority of the
home, leaves in its wake. T

161  thing is movable distant transportable alienable objective physical 
y. A thing is a movable— a furnishing [meuble]. It keeps a
certain proportion relative to the human body

161 substance
T he hand takes and comprehends*; it
recognizes the being of the existent, seizing upon the substance and
not the shadow; and at the same time it suspends that being, since
being is its possession. And yet this suspended, tamed being is main­
tained, is not worn away in the enjoyment that consumes and uses up.
For a time, it is posited as durable, as substance. 

163
Enjoyment is wholly nourished by the outside it inhabits, but its agreea­
bleness manifests its sovereignty, a sovereignty as foreign to the freedom

164
 T he other in which it jubilates— the elements—is initially
neither for nor against it. No assumption marks the primary relation of
enjoyment, which is neither suppression of nor reconciliation with the
“other”. But what is distinctive about the sovereignty of the I that
vibrates in enjoyment is that it is steeped in a medium and consequently
undergoes influences.

164
 To be a body is on
the one hand to stand [re tenir\, to be master of oneself, and, on the
other hand, to stand on the earth, to be in the other, and thus to be
encumbered by one’s body. B

167 groping emprise
T he hand is by essence groping and emprise.
Groping, the work of the hand par excellence, and the work adequate
to the apeiron of the element, makes possible the whole originality of the
final cause. 

169
— though representation be produced after
the event. The theoretical, being after the event, being essentially
memory, is to be sure not creative; but its critical essence—its retrogres­
sive movement— is no wise a possibility of enjoyment and labor or. It
evinces a new energy, oriented upstream, counter-current, which the
impassiveness of contemplation expresses only superficially

170
 Anterior posteri­
orly: separation is not thus “known” ; it is thus produced. 

170
 T o represent to oneself that from which I live would
be equivalent to remaining exterior to the elements in which I am
steeped. 

171 murder
ove. T he same can
not lay hold of this other without suppressing him. But the untravers-
able infinity of the negation of murder is announced by this dimension
of height, where the Other comes to me concretely in the ethical
impossibility of commiting this murder. 

171 height master
 T he height from which
language comes we designate with the term teaching. Socratic maieutics
prevailed over a pedagogy that introduced ideas into a mind by vio­
lating or seducing (which amounts to the same thing) that mind.
I t does not preclude the openness of the very dimension of infinity, which
is height, in the face of the Master. 

172
 Representation began not in the presence of a
thing exposed to my violence but empirically escaping my powers, but
in my possibility of calling this violence into question, in a possibility
produced by the commerce with infinity, by society.

172
 T he “vision” of
the face as face is a certain mode of sojourning in a home, or—to
speak in a less singular fashion— a certain form of economic life.
No human or interhuman relationship can be enacted outside of economy;
no face can be approached with empty hands and closed home. Recollec­
tion in a home open to the Other—hospitality—is the concrete and
initial fact of human recollection and separation; it coincides with the
Desire for the O ther absolutely transcendent. T he chosen home
is the very opposite of a root. I t indicates a disengagement, a wandering
[errance] which has made it possible, which is not a less with respect to
installation, but the surplus of the relationship with the Other,
metaphysics.
But the separated being can close itself up

174 
Generalization is a universalization—but universalization is not the
entry of a sensible thing into a no man’s land* of the ideal, is not purely
negative like a sterile renunciation, but is the offering of the world to the
Other. 

175 
. So many opposed movements
—the submergence in the elements which begins to open up interior-
ity, the sojourn, happy and needy, on the earth, time, and the conscious­
ness which loosens the vice of being and ensures the mastery of a
world—are united in the corporeal being of man— nakedness and indig­
ence, exposed to the anonymous exteriority of heat and cold but recollect­
ing in the interiority of being at home with oneself, and hence labor
and possession. In 


176
But neither do I break through the crust of separation by approaching
the Other in his works, which, like my own, are delivered over to the
anonymous field of the economic life, in which I maintain myself
egoist and separated, identifying in the diverse my own identity as the
same, through labor and possession


177
 Absolutely speaking, the interpretation of
the symbol can assuredly lead to an intention divined; but we penetrate
into this interior world as by burglary and without conjuring the absence.
The word alone—but disengaged from its density as a linguistic product
—can put an end to this absence.

177 hermeneutics adjective nominal adjective
 T o ask what is to ask as what: it
is not to take the manifestation for itself.

179 death
Death is not this master. Always future and unknown it gives rise to
fear or flight from responsibilities. Courage exists in spite of it. It has
its ideal elsewhere; it commits me to life. Death, source of all myths, is
present only in the Other, and only in him does it summon me urgently
to my final essence, to my responsibility.

179
The insufficiency of interiority is not immediately convertible into needs
presaging their satisfaction or suffering from their penury; the broken
interiority is not mended in the horizons outlined by needs. 

180
T he epiphany of exteriority, which exposes the deficiency of the sover­
eign interiority of the separated being, does not situate interiority, as one
part limited by another, in a totality

180
Teaching is a discourse in which the master can bring to the student
what the student does not yet know. It does 

180
 If separation
had to be described in terms of enjoyment and economy, this is because
the sovereignty of man was nowise a simple reverse of the relation with
the Other. 

181
 One has penetrated into his interior, but in
his absence. H

187
view, its constructed character

190 derrida?
the notions of intuitive geometry

191
 Vision moves into grasp. Vision opens upon a perspective, upon a
horizon, and describes a traversable distance, invites the hand to move­
ment and to contact, and ensures them.

194
Inasmuch as the access to beings concerns vision, it dominates those
beings, exercises a power over them. A thing is given, offers itself to
me. In gaining access to it I maintain myself within the same.

194 murder
And yet the O ther does not purely and simply negate the I ; total
negation, of which murder is the temptation and the attempt, refers to an
antecedent relation

195 sacred
. T he formal structure of language thereby
announces the ethical inviolability of the Other and, without any odor of
the “numinous,” his “holiness.”

195
off. For the ethical relationship which subtends
discourse is not a species of consciousness whose ray emanates from the I ;
it puts the I in question. This putting in question emanates from the
other.

197 
cceed in smothering the protestation of the private
individual, the apology of the separated being (though it be called
empirical and animal), of the individual who experiences as a tyranny
the State willed by his reason, but in whose impersonal destiny he no
longer recognizes his reason. W e recognize in the finitude to which
the Hegelian infinite is opposed, and which it encompasses, the finitude
of man before the elements, the finitude of man invaded by the there isj
at each instant traversed by faceless gods against whom labor is pursued in

197
The face resists possession, resists my powers.

198
The expression the face introduces into the world does not defy
the feebleness of my powers, but my ability for power.* 

198 negation and murder
n. I t finds
itself before a datum absolutely non-neutralizable. T he “negation”
effected by appropriation and usage remained always partial. The grasp
that contests the independence of the thing preserves it “for me.”
Neither the destruction of things, nor the hunt, nor the extermination of
living beings aims at the face, which is not of the world. They still
belong to labor, have a finality, and answer to a need. M urder alone
lays claim to total negation. Negation by labor and usage, like negation
by representation, effect a grasp or a comprehension, rest on or aim at
affirmation; they can. T o kill is not to dominate but to annihilate; it is
to renounce comprehension absolutely. M urder exercises a power over
what escapes power. It is still a power, for the face expresses itself in the
sensible, but already impotency, because the face rends the sensible. The
alterity that is expressed in the face provides the unique “m atter” possible
for total negation. I can wish to kill only an existent absolutely inde­
pendent, which exceeds my powers infinitely, and therefore does not op­
pose them but paralyzes the very power of power. The Other is the sole
being I can wish to kill.
But how does this disproportion between infinity and my powers differ
from that which separates a very great obstacle from a force applied to
it? I t would be pointless to insist on the banality of murder, which
reveals the quasi-null resistance of the obstacle. This most banal inci­
dent of human history corresponds to an exceptional possibility—since iclaims the total negation of a being.


199
 But he can oppose to me a
struggle, that is, oppose to the force that strikes him not a force of
resistance, but the very unforeseeableness of his reaction. 

199
 This infinity,
stronger than murder, already resists us in his face, is his face, is the
primordial expression, is the first word: “you shall not commit murder.”
T he infinite paralyses power by its infinite resistance to murder, which,
firm and insurmountable, gleams in the face of the Other, in the total
nudity of his defenceless eyes, in the nudity of the absolute openness of
the Transcendent. Th


199
other: the resistance of what
has no resistance— the ethical resistance. T he epiphany of the face
brings forth the possibility of gauging the infinity of the temptation
to murder, not only as a temptation to total destruction,

199-200 depth

T he impossibility of killing does not have a simply negative and formal
signification; the relation with infinity, the idea of infinity in us, condi­
tions it positively. Infinity presents itself as a face in the ethical resist­
ance that paralyses my powers and from the depths of defenceless eyes
rises firm and absolute in its nudity and destitution. T he comprehension
of this destitution and this hunger establishes the very proximity of the
other. But thus the epiphany of infinity is expression and discourse.

200
n. To
manifest oneself as a face is to impose onself above and beyond the mani­
fested and purely phenomenal form, to present oneself in a mode irreduci­
ble to manifestation, the very straightforwardness of the face to face,
without the intermediary of any image, in one’s nudity, that is, in one’s
destitution and hunger. In Desire are conjoined the movements unto the
Height and unto the Humility of the Other.
Expression does not radiate as a splendor that spreads unbe

201
“T o leave men without food is a fault that no circumstance attenuates;
the distinction between the voluntary and the involuntary does not apply
here,” says Rabbi Yochanan.1 Before the hunger of men responsibility is
measured only “objectively” ; it is irrecusable. T he face opens the
primordial discourse whose first word is obligation


201
 This attestation of oneself is possible
only as a face, that is, as speech. I t produces the commencement of
intelligibility, initiality itself, principality, royal sovereignty, which com­
mands unconditionally. T

202
 If at the bottom of
speech there did not subsist this originality of expression, this break with
every influence, this dominant position of the speaker foreign to all
compromise and all contamination, this straightforwardness of the face
to face, speech would not surpass the plane of activity, of which it is
evidently not a species— even though language can be integrated into a
system of acts and serve as an instrument. 


202-3 nietzsche and the poetic, mystivism, sk
T he ethical relation, the face to face, also cuts across every relation
one could call mystical, where events other than that of the presentation
of the original being come to overwhelm or sublimate the pure sincerity
of this presentation, where intoxicating equivocations come to enrich the
primordial univocity of expression, where discourse becomes incantation
as prayer becomes rite and liturgy, where the interlocutors find them­
selves playing a role in a drama that has begun outside of them. Here resides the rational character of the ethical relation and of language. No
fear, no trembling could alter the straightforwardness of this relation­
ship, which preserves the discontinuity of relationship, resists fusion, and
where the response does not evade the question. T o poetic activity—
where influences arise unbeknown to us out of this nonetheless conscious
activity, to envelop it and beguile it as a rhythm, and where action is
borne along by the very work it has given rise to, where in a dionysiac
mode the artist (according to Nietzsche’s expression) becomes a work of
art—is opposed the language that at each instant dispels the charm
of rhythm and prevents the initiative from becoming a role. Discourse is
rupture and commencement, breaking of rhythm which enraptures and
transports the interlocutors—prose.
T he face in which the other— the absolutely other—presents himself
does not negate the same, does not do violence to it as do opinion or
authority or the thaumaturgic supernatural. I t remains commensurate
with him who welcomes; it remains terrestrial. 


203
The relation with the O ther as a relation with his transcendence— the
relation with the O ther who puts into question the brutal spontaneity of
one’s immanent destiny—introduces into me what was not in me. But
this “action” upon my freedom precisely puts an end to violence

204 birth
. T he idea
of infinity in me, implying a content overflowing the container, breaks
with the prejudice of maieutics without breaking with rationalism, since
the idea of infinity, far from violating the mind, conditions nonviolence
itself, that is, establishes ethics. T he other is not for reason a scandal
that puts it in dialectical movement, but the first teaching. A being
receiving the idea of Infinity, receiving since it cannot derive it from
itself, is a being taught in a non-maieutic fashion, a being whose very
existing consists in this incessant reception of teaching, in this incessant
overflowing of self (which is tim e). T o think is to have the idea of
infinity, or to be taught. Rational thoug

205-6
 Merleau-Ponty, among
others, and better than others, showed that disincarnate thought thinking
speech before speaking it, thought constituting the world of speech,
adding a world of speech to the world antecedently constituted out of

206
Already thought consists in foraging in the system of signs, in the
particular tongue of a people or civilization, and receiving signification
from this very operation.

rigor

207
T he symbol marks the inadequateness of what is given in
consciousness with regard to the being it symbolizes, a consciousness
needy and hungry for the being it lacks, for the being announced in the
very precision with which its absence is lived, a potency that evinces the
act. Sig

208-9
. I t is not the impersonal in me that Reason
would establish, but an I myself capable of society, an I that has arisen in
enjoyment as separated, but whose separation would itself be necessary
for infinity to be— for its infinitude is accomplished as the “facing.”


209
Utilizing a sign is therefore not
limited to substituting an indirect relation for the direct relation with a
thing, but permits me to render the things offerable, detach them from
my own usage, alienate them, render them exterior

211 footnote prior
my awareness of God must be prior to that of myself. 

212 magesty 
ression of this transformation
of the idea of infinity conveyed by knowledge into Majesty approached as
a face.

212
T he presentation of the face, expression, does not disclose an inward
world previously closed, adding thus a new region to comprehend or to
take over.** On the contrary, it calls to me above and beyond the given
that speech already puts in common among us. 


213  propethic ethical
T he face in its nakedness as a face presents to
me the destitution of the poor one and the stranger; but this poverty and
exile which appeal to my powers, address me, do not deliver them­
selves over to these powers as givens, remain the expression of the face.
T he poor one, the stranger, presents himself as an equal. His equality
within this essential poverty consists in referring to the third party, thus
present at the encounter, whom in the midst of his destitution the Other
already serves. He comes to join me. But he joins me to himself for ser­
vice; he commands me as a Master. This command can concern me only
inasmuch as I am master myself; consequently this command commands
me to command. T he thou is posited in front of a we. T o be we is
not to “jostle” one another or get together around a common task. T he
presence of the face, the infinity of the other, is a destituteness, a presence
of the third party (that is, of the whole of humanity which looks at us),
and a command that commands commanding. This is why the relation
with the Other, discourse, is not only the putting in question of my
freedom, the appeal coming from the other to call me to responsibility, is
not only the speech by which I divest myself of the possession that
encircles me by setting forth an objective and common world, but is also
sermon, exhortation, the prophetic word. By essence the prophetic word
responds to the epiphany of the face, doubles all discourse not as a
discourse about moral themes, but as an irreducible movement of a dis­
course which by essence is aroused by the epiphany of the face inasmuch
as it attests the presence of the third party, the whole of humanity, in the
eyes that look at me. 

214 family
s. I t is
stated as a kinship of men. T h at all men are brothers is not explained by
their resemblance, nor by a common cause of which they would be the
effect, like medals which refer to the same die that struck them. Pater­
nity is not reducible to a causality in which individuals would mysteri­
ously participate, and which would determine, by no less mysterious an
effect, a phenomenon of solidarity.

 Human fraternity has then two
aspects: it involves individualities whose logical status is not reducible to
the status of ultimate differences in a genus, for their singularity consists
in each referring to itself. (An individual having a common genus with
another individual would not be removed enough from it.) 

 Monotheism signifies this human kinship, this idea of a human
race that refers back to the approach of the Other in the face, in a
dimension of height, in responsibility for oneself and for the Other.

215
 More, for my position as I consists in being able to respond to
this essential destitution of the Other, finding resources for myself.
T he Other who dominates me in his transcendence is thus the stranger,
the widow, and the orphan, to whom I am obligated.
These differences between the O ther and me do not depend on differ­
ent “properties” that would be inherent in the “I,” on the one hand, and,
on the other hand, in the Other, nor on different psychological disposi­
tions which their minds would take on from the encounter. They are
due to the I-Other conjuncture, to the inevitable orientation of being
“starting from oneself” toward “the O ther.” T he priority of this
orientation over the terms that are placed in it (and which cannot arise
without this orientation) summarizes the theses of the present work.

215
Being is not first,


216
 I t leaves room for a process of
being that is deduced from itself, that is, remains separated and capable
of shutting itself up against the very appeal that has aroused it, but also
capable of welcoming this face of infinity with all the resources of its
egoism: economically.

216
Discourse conditions thought, for the first intelligible is not a concept,
but an intelligence whose inviolable exteriority the face states in uttering
the “you shall not commit murder.” T he essence of discourse is ethical.
In stating this thesis, idealism is refused.

218
 T he impossibility of treating life in function of being
is manifested compellingly in Bergson, where duration no longer imitates,
in its fallenness, an immobile eternity, or in Heidegger, where possibility
no longer is referred to ergon as a dynamis

219
 It
does not accelerate the inward maturation of a reason common to a ll; it
teaches and introduces the new into a thought. T he introduction of the
new into a thought, the idea of infinity, is the very work of reason. The
absolutely new is the Other

 In discovering, as correlative of experience, the Other,
him who, being in himself essentially, can speak, and nowise sets himself
up as an object, the novelty contributed by experience is reconciled with
the ancient Socratic exigency of a mind nothing can force, an exigency
Leibniz again answers to in refusing the monads windows. 

220
n. This power
entails a different sense of absolution for each of the separated term s; the
Metaphysician is not absolute in the same sense as the Metaphysical.
T he dimension of height from which the Metaphysical comes to the
Metaphysician indicates a sort of non-homogeneity of space, such that a
radical multiplicity, distinct from numerical multiplicity, can here be
produced. Nu

In this
splendor the diverse is united—under the panoramic look it calls for.

221 reflection
 Multiplicity therefore implies an objectivity posited in the
impossibility of total reflection, in the impossibility of conjoining the I
and the non-I in a whole. This impossibility is not negative—which
would be to still posit it by reference to the idea of truth contemplated.
I t results from the surplus of the epiphany of the other, who dominates
me from his height.

222 perspectivism
d, statues looking at one another with empty
eyes, idols which, contrary to Gyges, are exposed and do not see. O ur
analyses of separation have opened another perspective

222 perspective
cepts presupposes a subjective perspec­
tive, and a pluralism of wills. T he point at which this perspective
converges does not form a part of the totality. Violence in nature thus
refers to an existence precisely not limited by an other, an existence that
maintains itself outside of the totality. But the exclusion of violence by
beings susceptible of being integrated into a totality is not equivalent to
peace. Totality absorbs the multiplicity of beings, which peace implies.
Only beings capable of w ar can rise to peace. W ar like peace presup­
poses beings structured otherwise than as parts of a totality.


In war
beings refuse to belong to a totality, refuse community, refuse law; no
frontier stops one being by another, nor defines them. They affirm
themselves as transcending the totality, each identifying itself not by its
place in the whole, but by its self.
W a r presupposes the transcendence of the antagonist; it is waged
against man. I t is surrounded with honors and pays the last honors; it
aims at a presence that comes always from elsewhere, a being that
appears in a face. I t is neither the hunt nor struggle with an ele­
ment. T he possibility, retained by the adversary, of thwarting the
best laid calculations expresses the separation, the breach of totality,
across which the adversaries approach one another. T he warrier runs a
risk; no logistics guarantees victory. T he calculations that make possible
the determination of the outcome of a play of forces within a totality do
not decide war. It lies at the limit of a supreme confidence in oneself
and a supreme risk. I t is a relation between beings exterior to totality,
which hence are not in touch with one another.


223
 I t implies a specific structure of the terms
in relation. Violence bears upon only a being both graspable and
escaping every hold. W ithout this living contradiction in the being that
undergoes violence the deployment of violent force would reduce itself to
a labor.
Thus for relationsh

224-5
 Independence would not be equivalent
to the idea of causa sui, which, moreover, is belied by birth, non-chosen
and impossible to choose (the great drama of contemporary thought),
which situates the will in an anarchic world, that is, a world without
origin.
Thus freedom, an abstraction that reveals itself to be self-contradic-
224
 Totality and Infinity
tory when one supposes it to have a limitation, can not describe beings in
the relation that does not constitute totality, beings in war.
A being independent of and yet at the same time exposed to the other is
a temporal being: to the inevitable violence of death it opposes its time,
which is postponement itself. I t is not finite freedom that makes the
notion of time intelligible; it is time that gives a meaning to the notion of
finite freedom. Tim e is precisely the fact that the whole existence of the
mortal being—exposed to violence—is not being for death, but the “not
yet” which is a way of being against death, a retreat before death in the
very midst of its inexorable approach. In war death is brought to what
is moving back, to what for the moment exists completely. Thus in war
the reality of the time that separates a being from its death, the reality
of a being taking up a position with regard to death, that is, the reality of
a conscious being and its interiority, is recognized. As causa sui or
freedom beings would be immortal, and could not, in a kind of dumb
and absurd hatred,* grapple on to one another. W ere beings only given
over to violence, only mortal, they would be dead in a world where
nothing opposes anything, a world whose time would break up into
eternity. T he notion of a mortal but temporal being, apprehended in the
will (a notion we shall develop) differs fundamentally from every
causality leading to the idea of the causa sui. Such a being is ex­
posed, but also opposed to violence. Violence does not befall it as
an accident that befalls a sovereign freedom. T he hold that violence
has over this being— the mortality of this being— is the primordial fact.
Freedom itself is but its adjournment by time. W hat is at issue is not
finite freedom in which a singular compound of activity and passivity
would be produced, but rather a freedom originally null, offered in death
to the other, but in which time arises as a detente: the free will is neces­
sity relaxed and postponed rather than finite freedom. I t is detente or
distension—postponement by virtue of which nothing is definitive yet,
nothing consummated, skill which finds for itself a dimension of retreat
there where the inexorable is imminent.
g

225
 W a r can be produced only when a being postponing its death
is exposed to violence. I t can be produced only where discourse was
possible: discourse subtends war itself. Moreover violence does not aim
simply at disposing of the other as one disposes of a thing, but, already at
the limit of murder, it proceeds from unlimited negation. I t can aim at
only a presence itself infinite despite its insertion in the field of my
powers. Violence can aim only at a face.


225
This transcendence is not to be described negatively, but is
manifested positively in the moral resistance of the face to the violence of
murder. T he force of the Other is already and henceforth moral.
Freedom, be it that of war, can be manifested only outside totality, but
this “outside totality” opens with the transcendence of the face.


226
But in its work, which has a signification but remains mute, the
will remains unexpressed. Labor, in which it is exerted, is visibly
inserted in the things, but the will forthwith absents itself from them,
since works take on the anonymity of merchandise, an anonymity into
which, as a wage-earner, the worker himself may disappear.

ds all the strings that operate its being, is by its
work exposed to the Other. Its e


227
T he other can dispossess me of my work, take it
or buy it, and thus direct my very behavior; I am exposed to instiga­
tion. T he work is destined to this alien Sinngebung from the moment of
its origin in me. 


227-8
Historical events link up in works. W ills
without works will constitute no history; there is no purely interior
history. History, in which the interiority of each will manifests itself only in plastic form

228
 As long as the will, in a being who
speaks, takes up again and defends his work against a foreign will,
history lacks the distance it lives from. Its reign commences in the
world of realities-results, the world of “complete works,” the heritage of
dead wills

228
Fate does not precede history;
it follows it. Fate is the history of the historiographers, accounts of the
survivors, who interpret, that is, utilize the works of the dead. T he his­
torical distance which makes this historiography, this violence, this
subjection possible is proportionate to the time necessary for the will to
lose its work completely. Historiography recounts the way the survivors
appropriate the works of dead wills to themselves; it rests on the
usurpation carried out by the conquerors, that is, by the survivors; it
recounts enslavement, forgetting the life that struggles against slavery.

229
 M aterial things, bread and wine,
clothing and the home, like the blade of steel, have a hold on the “for
itself” of the will. T he part of eternal truth that materialism involves
lies in the fact that the human will can be laid hold of in its works. 


 T he steel touches not an inert being, the gold attracts
not a thing but a will which qua will, qua “for itself,” should have been
immune from every attack. 

 This status of the will is the body


 —but is susceptible of being coerced and enslaved as a will, becoming
a servile soul. Gold and threats force it not only to sell its products but
to sell itself. O r again, the human will is not heroic.

230
T he body is its ontological regime, and not an
object. 



to a foreign will can revert into satisfaction given to this hostile will.
T he acceptance of death therefore does not enable me to resist with
certainty the murderous will of the Other


231
, even its supreme initiative,
the breaking with being, is transcribed. In its effort to escape the Other
in dying, it recognizes the other. T he suicide to which it resolves itself
in order to escape servitude is inseparable from the pain of “losing,”
whereas this death should have shown the absurdity of every game. M ac­
beth wishes for the destruction of the world in his defeat and his death
(“and wish th’estate o’th’world were now undone” ) — or more pro­
foundly still, he wishes that the nothingness of death be a void as total
as that which would have reigned had the world never been created.

231
 I speak a word that, in the measure
that it welcomes the Other as Other, offers or sacrifices to him a product
of labor, and consequently does not play above economy. T

232
 the simple unity of number of the gods living each
for itself in the interstices between beings requires mortality and cor­
poreity. 


232
ture. M ore profoundly and as it
were a priori we approach death as nothingness in the passion for
murder. T he spontaneous intentionality of this passion aims at annihila­
tion. Cain, when he slew Abel, should have possessed this knowledge of
death. T he identifying of death with nothingness befits the death of the
other in murder. But at the same time this nothingness presents itself
there as a sort of impossibility. For the O ther cannot present himself as
O ther outside of my conscience, and his face expresses my moral
impossibility of annihilating. This interdiction is to be sure not
equivalent to pure and simple impossibility, and even presupposes the
possibility which precisely it forbids— bu

233 DEPTH
m the very depths of the eyes I
want to extinguish, looks at me as the eye that in the tomb

233
 T he “knowledge”
of the threatening precedes every experience reasoned in terms of
the death of the O ther; in naturalist language this is termed an
instinctive knowledge of death. It is not the knowledge of death that
defines menace; it is in the imminence of death, in its irreducible oncom­
ing movement, that menace originally consists, that the “knowledge of
death” is (if one may put it so) uttered and articulated. Fear measures
this movement. T he imminence of the menace does not come from a
precise point of the future. Ultima latet. T he unforeseeable character
of the ultimate instant is not due to an empirical ignorance, to the limited
horizon of our understanding, which a greater understanding would
have been able to overcome. T he unforeseeable character of death is due
to the fact that it does not lie within any horizon. I t is not open to
grasp. It takes me without leaving me the chance I have in a struggle,
for in reciprocal struggle I grasp what takes hold of me. In death I
am exposed to absolute violence, to murder in the night. But in fact
already in struggle I contend with the invisible. Struggle must not be
confounded with the collision of two forces whose issue one can foresee
and calculate. 

234
 Death threatens me from beyond.

 T he solitude of death does not make the Other
vanish, but remains in a consciousness of hostility, and consequently still
renders possible an appeal to the Other, to his friendship and his medica­
tion. T he doctor is an a priori principle of human mortality. 

 In the being for death of fear I am not
faced with nothingness, but faced with what is against me, as though
murder, rather than being one of the occasions of dying, were inseparable
from the essence of death, as though the approach of death remained one
of the modalities of the relation with the Other. T he violence of death
threatens as a tyranny, as though proceeding from a foreign will. The
order of necessity that is carried out in death is not like an implacable
law of determinism governing a totality, but is rather like the alienation
of my will by the Other. I t is, of course, not a question of

One does not know when death will come. W hat will come ? W ith
what does death threaten me? W ith nothingness or with recommence­
ment? 

 M y death comes from an instant upon which I can in no
way exercise my power. 



235
ith a look which as a look has always
an expanse before it, but perceives also the uninterrupted approach of an
instant infinitely future for the I who awaits it— ultima latet—which, in
a countercurrent movement, will efface this infinitesimal—but untrav-
ersable— distance. This interference of movements across the distance
that separates me from the last moment distinguishes the temporal
interval from spatial distance.
But imminence is at the same time menace and postponement.

Thus the fear for my being which is my relation with death is not the
fear of nothingness, but the fear of violence— and thus it extends into
fear of the Other, of the absolutely unforeseeable.


236
T he enemy or the
God over whom I can have no power* and who does not form a part of
my world remains yet in relation with me and permits me to will, but
with a will that is not egoist, a will that flows into the essence of desire
whose center of gravitation does not coincide with the I of need, the de­
sire that is for the Other. M urder, at the origin of death, reveals a
cruel world, but one to the scale of human relations. T he will, already
betrayal and alienation of itself but postponing this betrayal, on the way
to death but a death ever future, exposed to death but not immediately,
has time to be for the Other, and thus to recover meaning despite death.


T he being thus defined has its time at its disposal precisely
because it postpones violence, that is, because a meaningful order subsists
beyond death, and thus all the possibilities of discourse are not reduced
to desperate blows of a head struck against the wall

W e shall have to show this in the course of bring­
ing to light the other chance that the will seizes upon in the time left it
by its being against death: the founding of institutions in which the will
ensures a meaningful, but impersonal world beyond death.


institutions


254 sister soul
Love as a relation with the O ther can be reduced to this fundamental
immanence, be divested of all transcendence, seek but a connatural being,
a sister soul, present itself as incest. T he myth Aristophanes tells in
Plato’s Symposium, in which love reunites the two halves of one sole
being, interprets the adventure as a return to self. T he enjoyment
justifies this interpretation. I t brings into relief the ambiguity of an
event situated at the limit of immanence and transcendence. 

255
equivocal 


256 frailty 

 T o
love is to fear for another, to come to the assistance of his frailty. In this
frailty as in the dawn rises the Loved, who is the Beloved.* An
epiphany of the Loved, the feminine is not added to an object and a
T hou antecedently given or encountered in the neuter (the sole gender
formal logic knows). T he epiphany of the Beloved is but one with her
regime of tenderness. 

 These superlatives,
better than metaphors, denote a sort of paroxysm of materiality.


already profaning
and wholly profaned, 


METAPHOR -- clandestine and the exposed
T he simultaneity
of the clandestine and the exposed precisely defines profanation

 T he simultaneity or the equivocation of this
fragility and this weight of non-signifyingness [non-significance], heavier
than the weight of the formless real, we shall term femininity.


258
 I t is not that the caress would seek to
dominate a hostile freedom, to make of it its object or extort from it a
consent. Beyond the consent or the resistance of a freedom the caress
seeks what is not yet, a “less than nothing,” closed and dormant beyond
the future, consequently dormant quite otherwise than the possible,
which would be open to anticipation.

259
taken leave of “numbers and beings” is not
even a quality of an existent. T he tender designates a way, the way of
remaining in the no mans land between being and not-yet-being

259
 T he secret it forces does not
inform it as an experience; it overwhelms the relation of the I with itself
and with the non-I. An amorphous non-I sweeps away the I into an
absolute future where it escapes itself and loses its position as a subject.

262
 And only the face in its morality is exterior.
In this epiphany the face is not resplendent as a form clothing a content,
as an image, but as the nudity of the principle, behind which there is
nothing further. T he dead face becomes a form, a mortuary mask; it
is shown instead of letting see—but precisely thus no longer appears as a
face

T he principle “you shall not commit murder,” the very signifyingness
of the face, seems contrary to the mystery which Eros profanes, and which
is announced in the femininity of the tender. In the face the Other
expresses his eminence, the dimension of height and divinity from which
he descends. In his gentleness dawns his strength and his right. The
frailty of femininity invites pity for what, in a sense, is not yet, disrespect
for what exhibits itself in immodesty and is not discovered despite the
exhibition, that is, is profaned.

263
T he beautiful of
art inverts the beauty of the feminine face. I


263 laughter
Thus erotic nudity is as it were an inverted signification, a signification
that signifies falsely, a clarity converted into ardor and night, an expres­
sion that ceases to express itself, that expresses its renunciation of
expression and speech, that sinks into the equivocation of silence, a word
that bespeaks not a meaning but exhibition. Here lies the very lasci­
viousness of erotic nudity— the laughter that deflagrates in Shakespear­
ean witches’ sessions full of innuendos, beyond the decency of words, as
the absence of all seriousness, of all possibility for speech, the laughter of
“ambiguous tales” where the mechanism of laughter is not only ascriba-
ble to the formal conditions of the comic such as Bergson, for example,
has defined them in his book Laughter—there is in addition a content
which brings us to an order where seriousness is totally lacking. T he
beloved is opposed to me not as a will struggling with my own or subject
to my own, but on the contrary as an irresponsible animality which does
not speak true words. 

 T he face,
all straightforwardness and frankness, in its feminine epiphany dissimu­
lates allusions, innuendos. I t laughs under the cloak of its own expres­
sion, without leading to any specific meaning, hinting in the empty air,
signaling the less than nothing

 W e are here before a new category: before what is
behind the gates of being, before the less than nothing that eros tears
from its negativity and profanes. 


267 father's child
M y child is a stranger (Isaiah 49), but a stranger who is not
only mine, for he is me. He is me a stranger to myself. 

oedipus,  murder a stranger 
faterhood is unknown

268
 The I
as subject and support of powers does not exhaust the “concept” of the I,
does not command all the categories in which subjectivity, origin, and
identity are produced. 

269
. It articulates the time of the absolutely other, an
alteration of the very substance of him who can—‘his trans-substantia­
tion.

270
Voluptuosity, as the coinciding of the lover and the beloved, is charged
by their duality: it is simultaneously fusion and distinction.

effemination
T he relationship
with the carnal and the tender precisely makes this self arise incessantly:
the subject’s trouble is not assumed by his mastery as a subject, but
is his being moved [attendrissement], his eifemination, which the heroic
and virile I will remember as one of those things that stand apart from
“serious things.” 

 T he I returns to itself, finds itself again the same despite all its
recommencements, falls back on its feet again solitary, delineates but an
irreversible fate. 

271

T he subject is imposed upon itself, drags itself along like a possession

y. T he
“transcendence of fecundity” does not have the structure of intentional-
ity, does not reside in the powers of the I, for the alterity of the femi->
nine is associated with it: the erotic subjectivity is constituted in the com­
mon act of the sensing and the sensed as the self of an other, and
accordingly is constituted within a relation with the other, within a
relation with the face. In this community there plays an equivocation, to
be sure: the other presents himself as lived by myself, as object of my
enjoyment. 

272
 I t is precisely as itself that the I is, in the
relation with the O ther in femininity, liberated of its identity, that it can
be other on the basis of self as origin. In the I being can be produced as
infinitely recommencing, that is, properly speaking, as infinite.

273 engenders 
e. Fecundity evinces a unity that is not opposed
to multiplicity, but, in the precise sense of the term, engenders it.

274
If, instead of reducing itself to a change of
properties, climate, or level, transcendence would commit the very iden­
tity of the subject, we would witness the death of its substance.
I t may, certainly, be asked whether death is not transcendence itself;

275
. In the new that springs from it the subject recognizes
himself. H e finds himself again in it, masters it


perhaps to play with words

276
 T h at the vital impulse propagates itself across the
separation of individuals, that its trajectory is discontinuous, that is, that
it presupposes the intervals of sexuality and a specific dualism in its
articulation, is not seriously taken into consideration. 

 In voluptuosity the Other, the femi­
nine, withdraws into its mystery. T he relation with it is a relation
with its absence, an absence on the plane of knowledge— the unknown
—but a presence in voluptuosity. N or power: there is no initiative at
the birth of love, which arises in the passivity of its pangs. Sexuality is
in us neither knowledge nor power, but the very plurality of our existing.

277
 But
in this apparent contradiction and in the form of the son being is
infinitely and discontinuously, historical without fate. The past is recap­
tured at each moment from a new point, from a novelty that no
continuity, such as that which still weighs on the Bergsonian duration,
could compromise. For in continuity, where being bears the whole
burden of the past (even if in its projection unto the future it should, in
defiance of death, recommence), the past limits the infinitude of being,
and this limitation is manifested in its senescence.
T he recapture of this past can be produced as a recourse

278
But the son’s relation with the father across fecundity is not effected
only in recourse and the rupture which the I of the son accomplishes as
an I already existing. T he I owes its unicity as an I to the paternal
Eros. T he father does not simply cause the son. To be one’s son means
to be I in one’s son, to be substantially in him, yet without being main­
tained there in identity. O ur whole analysis of fecundity aimed to
establish this dialectical conjuncture, which conserves the two contradic­
tory movements. T he son resumes the unicity of the father and yet
remains exterior to the father: the son is a unique son.


T he I as I hence remains turned ethically to the face of the
other: fraternity is the very relation with the face in which at the same
time my election and equality, that is, the mastery exercised over me by
the other, are accomplished

279-80
essential production. But these relations free
themselves from their biological limitation. T he human I is posited in
fraternity: that all men are brothers is not added to man as a moral conquest, but constitutes his ipseity. Because my position as an I is
effectuated already in fraternity the face can present itself to me as a
face. 

282
 T he instants do not link up with one another indifferently,
but extend from the O ther unto me. T he future does not come to me
from a swarming of indistinguishable possibles which would flow toward
my present and which I would grasp; it comes to me across an absolute
interval whose other shore the Other absolutely other—though he be my
son—is alone capable of marking, and of connecting with the past. Bu

time adds something new to being, something
absolutely new. But the newness of springtimes that flower in the in­
stant (which, in good logic, is like the prior one) is already heavy with
all the springtimes lived through. T

284
T here must be a rupture of continuity, and
continuation across this rupture. 

T he death sentence does not approach as an
end of being, but as an unknown, which as such suspends power. The
constitution of the interval that liberates being from the limitation of
fate calls for death. T he nothingness of the interval— a dead time—is
the production of infinity. Resurrection constitutes the principal event
of time. T here is therefore no continuity in being. Time is discontin­
uous ; one instant does not come out of another without interruption, by
an ecstasy. In continuation the instant meets its death, and resuscitates;
death and resurrection constitute time. But such a formal structure
presupposes the relation of the I with the O ther and, at its basis,
fecundity across the discontinuous which constitutes time.


289  reversion, perspective
There exists a logical
passage from the like to the same; singularity logically arises from the
logical sphere exposed to the gaze and organized into a totality by the
reversion of this sphere into the interiority of the I, the reversion, so to
speak, of convexity into concavity. And the entire analysis of interiority
pursued in this work describes the conditions of this reversion. Relations
such as the idea of infinity, which the formal logic of the gaze cannot let
show through without absurdity, and which it prompts us to interpret in
theological or psychological terms (as a miracle or as an illusion), have a
place in the logic of interiority— in a sort of micro-logic—


sandy 
being is exteriority. This formula does not only mean to denounce
the illusions of the subjective, and claim that objective forms alone, in
opposition to the sands in which arbitrary thought is mired and lost,
merit the name of being.


290 perspectivism
 The
face to face is established starting with a point separated from exteriority
so radically that it maintains itself of itself, is me; every other relation
that would not part from this separated and therefore arbitrary point
(but whose arbitrariness and separation are produced in a positive mode
as m e), would miss the— necessarily subjective— field of truth.


291 curvature of space  
 T he truth of being is not the image
of being, the idea of its nature; it is the being situated in a subjective field
which deforms vision, but precisely thus allows exteriority to state itself,
entirely command and authority: entirely superiority. This curvature of
the intersubjective space inflects distance into elevation; it does not
falsify being, but makes its truth first possible.
One cannot “allow for” this refraction “produced” by the subjective
field, so as to thus “correct” i t ; it constitutes the very mode in which the
exteriority of being is effectuated in its truth. T he impossibility of
“total reflection” is not due to a flaw in subjectivity. , T he so-called
“objective” nature of the entities that would appear outside of this
“curvature of space”— the phenomenon—would, on the contrary, indi­
cate the loss of metaphysical truth, the superior truth—in the literal
sense of the term. This “curvature” of the intersubjective space in
which exteriority is effectuated (we do not say “in which it appears” ) as
superiority must be distinguished from the arbitrariness of “points of
view” taken upon objects that appear. But the latter, source of errors
and opinions, issued from the violence opposed to exteriority, is the price
of the former.
This “curvature of space” expresses the relation between human
beings. T h at the Other is placed higher than me would be a pure and
simple error if the welcome I make him consisted in “perceiving” a
nature. Sociology, psychology, physiology are thus deaf to exteriority.
M an as O ther comes to us from the outside, a separated— or holy— face.
His exteriority, that is, his appeal to me, is his truth. M y response is not
added as an accident to a “nucleus” of his objectivity, but first produces
his truth (which his “point of view” upon me can not nullify). This
surplus of truth over being and over its idea, which we suggest by the
metaphor of the “curvature of intersubjective space,” signifies the divine
intention of all truth. This “curvature of space” is, perhaps, the very
presence of God.

292 deleuze 
Exteriority, taken as the essence of being, signifies the resistance of the
social multiplicity to the logic that totalizes the multiple. 



 I t does not consist in reconstituting the
wholeness of the perfect being which Aristophanes speaks of in the myth
of the iSymposium, nor in being immersed again in the whole and
abdicating into the intemporal, nor in gaining the whole through history

creation

 One
of the principal theses of this work is that the noesis-noema structure is
not the primordial structure of intentionality (which is not equivalent to
interpreting intentionality as a logical relation or as causality)

295 es gibt give 
In effect, the being who speaks to me and to whom I respond or whom
I interrogate does not offer himself to me, does not give himself so that I
could assume this manifestation, measure it to my own interiority, and
receive it as come from myself. 

fragments
T he relation between the
“fragments” of separated being is a face to face, the irreducible and
ultimate relation.

height perspectivism
 T he distance
of this exteriority immediately extends to height. T he eye can conceive
it only by virtue of position which, as an above-below disposition, consti­
tutes the elementary fact of morality. Because it is the presence of
exteriority the face never becomes an image or an intuition.

W e have thus the conviction of having broken with the philosophy of
the Neuter: with the Heideggerian Being of the existent whose imper­
sonal neutrality the critical work of Blanchot has so much contributed to
bring out, with Hegel’s impersonal reason, which shows to the personal
consciousness only its ruses. T

T o metaphysical thought, where a finite has the idea of infinity—
where radical separation and relationship with the other are produced
simultaneously—we have reserved the term intentionality, consciousness
o f .. . . 

T he fact of starting
from oneself is equivalent to separation. But the act of starting from
oneself and separation itself can be produced in being only by opening
the dimension of interiority

institutions

sands of interioirty

 Fecundity permits the assuming of the actual as the vestibule
of a future. It opens the subterranean, where a life called inward or
merely subjective seemed to take refuge, upon being

301

 Contrary
to the Spinozist tradition, this going beyond death is produced not in the
universality of thought but in the pluralist relation, in 


303 must be inverted

 Morality is
not a branch of philosophy, but first philosophy.

or again, that the essence
of language is friendship and hospitality. T he other is not the nega­
tion of the same, as Hegel would like to say. T he fundamental fact of
the ontological scission into same and other is a non-allergic relation
of the same with the other.

305-6
 Pluralism is accomplished in goodness proceeding from me
to the other, in which first the other, as absolutely other, can be
produced, without an alleged lateral view upon this movement having
any right to grasp of it a truth superior to that which is produced in
goodness itself. 

T he situation in which the I thus posits itself before truth in placing
its subjective morality in the infinite time of its fecundity— a situation in
which the instant of eroticism and the infinity of paternity are conjoined
— is concretized in the marvel of the family. T he family does not only
result from a rational arrangement of animality; it does not simply mark
a step toward the anonymous universality of the State. I t identifies itself
outside of the State, even if the State reserves a framework for it. As
source of human time it permits the subjectivity to place itself under a
judgment while retaining speech. This is a metaphysically ineluctable
structure which the State would not dismiss, as in Plato, nor make exist
in view of its own disappearance, as Hegel would have it. T he biologi­
cal structure of fecundity is not limited to the biological fact. In the
biological fact of fecundity are outlined the lineaments of fecundity in
general as a relation between man and man and between the I and itself
not resembling the structures constitutive of the State, lineaments of a
reality that is not subordinated to the State as a means and does not
represent a reduced model of the State.






ARISTOPHANES
63
? Has not Plato, rejecting the myth of the63
androgynous being presented by Aristophanes, caught sight of the non-
nostalgic character of Desire and of philosophy, implying autochthonous
existence and not exile— desire as erosion of the absoluteness of being by
the presence of the Desirable, which is consequently a revealed presence,
opening Desire in a being that in se
293
 I t does not consist in reconstituting the
wholeness of the perfect being which Aristophanes speaks of in the myth
of the iSymposium, nor in being immersed again in the whole and
abdicating into the intemporal, nor in gaining the whole through history.
