
Genevieve Vaughn
Huchitan. Juchitan city of the women 
Tanja thorjussen 
Diego Lopez
Maria Liis

Get books on Latvia and Lithuania

Find consensus
Women are the should son the councils 

Matriarchal manifesto in English ? 
Ninety 1980
Women make up half of population two thirds of income and own less than 
Published in 1980 

war state --> literally we live in it
the most important male expense is military.  military is a patriarchal project

consensus --> local vs federal

prisets
fighting

the little people have the say 
politics from below from the clan house 

from a individual to a delegate.  this is how it works.  

* delegate instead of representative

association streering group
or everyone is involved consensus
communities basis 

democracy is interest groups fighting against each other 


i make a cross on a paper and i give away my power

ruled from above
party politics fighting against each other special interest manipulation patriarchally

system of domination 
you hae the freedom to say it but you have to do it the way that the state tells you to do it 

starting with communities startring from below


momunions template for livign organizing to raise children together new york times 

minoritarian and majoritarian minoitry is silenced 

parties are not the solution
so many people are silenced

high communication competence

interest always have their standpoint and they negotiate until a compromise 
like a fight in words  not a real consensus
interest groups and not people who want to lve together 


they want the best advantage. not real communication 

research bag sizes


not individual persons but gendered 
not neutral individauls but already gendered
not as a figth in words
different perspectives

integrative decision making https://www.holaspirit.com/

children and adults

networks

12 step rotating leadershi

gift economy
system of above vs system from below

crisis of the superstructure
abolish military 

capitalist patriarchal system 

federal is the council of the delegates

regional councils 

https://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/12/realestate/single-mother-households-co-living.html


a new relatinship to the earth

conflict drives a story
vs a common project

From Ursula k. (Saint) Le Guin “Modernist manuals of writing often conflate story with conflict. This reductionism reflects a culture that inflateis aggression and competition while cultivating ignorance of other behavioral options. No narrative of any complexity can be built on or reduced to a single element. Conflict is one kind of behavior. There are others, equally important in any human life, such as relating, finding, losing, bearing, discovering, parting, changing. Change is the universal aspect of all these sources of story. Story is something moving, something happening, something or somebody changing.”

war is always in history

patriarchy is based on war typical human attitude perspective of the system
kill conflict

gift giving is the natural attitude

idea of sisters in the plant world
aniamls are their brothers
clans are called after animals

teacher mother
nature is our teacher  biosystem collaborates

corn way of life lead by women 

Gondwana mythology

cave of mother earth
cherokee story of creation indigenous puerto rico sources

souls of the dead coming back from dead looking for sweetness  we are from the cave
emerald swann

siem of cheif

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qV5sGEneGCM