Levinasian Questions Concerning Technology
-----------------------------------

1. . The Turing Test. I have wanted to write about this for decades. The Turing Test places a human interlocutor in one room where they carry on a conversation with an interlocutor who may be human or an AI. The test is whether the AI can effectively simulate human responses.
So what Levinas defines as the Other's alterity is their futurity, of their capacity to respond in unpredicatable and unanticipated ways. It's the idea of freedom as ungraspable taken from Bergson's _Creative Evolution_ applied to the futurity as Other rather than the duration of the Self.
So we used to be able to tell the transparently mechanical nature of AI but now AI can compute associations better than humans can and will soon be able to simulate the way humans make associations. At least this is theoretically possible.
So as much as we Levinasians like to romaticize the infinite futurity of the Other, the reality is that even the other's human mind is constrained in a finite way and so even their unpredictability is probably calculable, in a way that we could imagine an AI calculating.


2. Most of my work for the past decade or so has been on Levinas, anarchism, and mothering -- "Granarchism" I call it. You can read more on my web page.
https://waste.org/~roadrunner/writing/Levinas/
The narrative in "Totality and Infinity" as well as in all of Levinas's philosophical works is the idea of continuous creation, taken from Bergson / Descartes as well as from Jewish scripture (Psalm 104:30).
The operative metaphors throughout his work is always familial -- sister souls, widows, orphans, fathers, mothers, brothers, sons, perhaps even a daughter.
The metaphoric is always one of birth and rebirth, of the regeneration of gendered generations.
These metaphors of the spirit traveling birth and rebirth, this understanding of the importance of maternity, is widespread throughout culture.
So what will it mean when birthing becomes detached from the generation of generations as that technology develops

NOTE: I believe that questions similar to "Does technology have a Face" are bad ones.  . In general, the idea of the "Face" is widely misunderstood. Questions like "What is the face" and "Does X have a face" are very clearly an ontological questions, one of predicaton, of the Being of Face. Clearly the wrong questions, reifying questions.

Gad Horowitz Right. The face isn't a thing. The mistake of reification, predication, ontological attribution is all over the scholarship. "The Face" is a mode of relating, one that is fundamentally ambiguous as you point out. This is an obvious truth: I see everything Gad presents as himself, as his Face, on his Facebook for example as a mode of self-presentation, but is that presentation of Face really who Gad is? Yes and no. The Face is a fundamentally ambiguous presentation. Moreover, "le visage" is a sort of a metonym for "intentionality" in general and sort of a wordplay on vision, vis-a-vis, videre (to see). It's an inquiry into the positionality of the one who sees, the one who looks, an inquiry into the position of the masculine, virile Subject. The face-to-face is a reconsideration of Hegel's struggle between self-consciousnesses, but this absolutely not the only nor the most important dynamic in Levinas. It's his undermining of all that macho bullshit of virile subjectivity. In his later works, he makes it more clear that the face is not the most important concept.
Really: worship of the Face in Levinas is flat out idolatry
