isolation of labor
communality 

cultural autonomism
work refusal 

commonality

autonomism
harry cleaver reading capital politically 
italian autonomism black radicalism italian feminism

act as if you are free already
because we need it 
not through the state but through independante efforts
against racism and labor 
different practices that overlap

60s italy 
rapidly industrialising country 
burly guys going to facotries
aren't being represented by unions or communists 

not hapening in stages.  intensify dynamics
political actors you find aren't the ones you expect 
forms of resistance where you didn't expect it 
reversal of perspective tronti 
a lot of marxist theory is so developed capitalism
how do people resist capitalism 
with the development of struggle against it 
:the one who struggles against his slavery" refusals
shape the struggle 

class composition
constitanly created and recreated class composition

exist in the way we work 

not tecnical but our composition as abilities

not business press but on the skills amonst ourselves


cultural even at this point aster rosa
working at day reading poetry at night 

lucacz aesthetics 

social factory 
all of life is element in process, of production and reproduciton
everything can undermine it and revolt it 
struggle where you are 

struggles around housing 
critical theory those are identity politics not class
all these connect to the class according to the develoment of social factory
gendered housework is part of labored reporducsion and how workers reproduce and are brought into the economy 

autonomedia.  brooklyn autonomia.  william bourroughts in bowery .  bifo.  no wave.  schizo culture semiotexte .  art media mixing together.  

hardt and negri 
moves into university and gets formalized 
negri and deleuze normalized 


material labor. the question is always class composition.  how does the world work.  skills capabilities between people.  different set of skills.  organize differently .   how do we use them to other ends?  work we are involved in aren't always the most productive or beneficial.  create arts of east london.  their practice was going . individualizing discussion.  talking about your practice.   what do we do together.   

how would it operate today?  refusing work.  you just walk out.  relation to job.  health care worker.  care for and assist.  

industrial or physical labor.  tools or leave. disavow the work.  better notion of working .  more fulfiling. avoidance of work.   


self connected to work.  practice.  they make themselves and sense of self.  who you are and what you do.  you have a connection to the work.  refusal is less a refusal of the job.   but the way that work operates .  work as refusing it and putting it back into the work process operates 


invisibilized and stigmatized. dignity for person who does it.  holding on and worthy and valuable.  
dignity .  


different modes of refusal.  

refusal is three different moments   


anecdotes  
ben autonomism  exit interview 
never had zerowork training  
refuse work .  you can't just say i am stopping.  the joke is no dishes are clean.  are still important kinds of work.  more about the what can we do collectively together such that work and labor have the same domination of our lives.  not an individual question .  what are the collective modes of organization that you do with other people 


tomas
----

what is autonomism 

organizational practice 

capital and the state 

carving out 
no end sight 

italian auto-reduction 
just price 

don't give up right to decide
let the institutions decide
heterogenous social perspective

cultural labor 

gentrificaiton economy 
that is where art strike comes in as sabotage because of the context
and what it does with it  
collective activity 
absurd to talk about revolution but we have to 

care about the other and 
autonomy is only possible when you are willing to give up the self 
not a sigle individual but an relationships that evolve through time

how you find yourself transformed in the relation for 


the smiling baby produces use value for the mother

things that aren't labor  

an outside to capital is it possible 

self naming

weak resistance
look at moments of ressistance
resist the struggle 
resistance of the weak 
remorse

