In this talk, I intend to continue my exploration of anarchafeminist thinking by bringing Kropotkin's anarchocommunism into dialogue with feminist writings on care and motherhood.  In particular, I will consider how Kropotkin's claim that mutual aid and mutual support are "feature[s] of the greatest importance for the maintenance of life, the preservation of each species, and its further evolution" with anthropologist Sarah Blaffer Hrdy's discussion of grandmothers as others in her book "Mothers and Others: The Evolutionary Origins of Mutual Understanding." 

Given that our central term in this discussion is "evolution", my first inclination is to inquire into the meaning of this term.  Evolution, the study of how living systems develop over time, is therefore a particular case of the philosophical inquiry into "Becoming"

The philosophical inquiry into becoming often stands in relation to a thinking of Being that understands the world as constituted by permanent essences underlying all particular beings; upon these substances stand our usage of nouns in everyday language; they establish stable identities and legal persons; they situate consciousness and agency in human subjects, and so on. In contrast, Becoming traces how things change over time, the ways in which "me" right now is related to the "me" a hundred yards away from here, a second in the past or a second in the future. One of the first thinkers of Becoming, Heraclitus of Ephesus, expressed this idea in his assertion that one can not step into the same river twice, and the motto that "everything flows". That is, all individual, identifiable things emerge as an effect, as the temporary assemblages of the flux of anonymous forces.  

How does this flux occur? According to Heraclitus, conflict and war constitute the dynamic tension behind the creation of all things: "War is father/king/lord (  πατήρ ) of all; and some he has shown as gods, others men; some he has made slaves, others free".  The logic of creation for Heraclitus already entails a certain set of patriarchal relations of political domination.  

Although the patriarchal resonances of Heraclitus's thinking aren't always so prominent, his idea that conflict is fundamental to the dynamic of becoming, to the flow of change over time, has been widely influential.   
1.  Mechanism:  Atomism, empiricism and mechanism all inherit the idea that every material thing becomes constituted by the collision of particles, which can be expressed by the interaction of newtonian and non-newtonian forces. 
2.  Spinoza: Spinoza borrows the idea that a thing's essence is constituted by its striving to persist in its own being and to increase its own power of action. 
3.  Hegel/Marx: Hegel and Marx argue that all historical development occurs through conflicts between dialectially opposed forces. 
4.  Nietzsche:  Nietzsche claims that the wills-to-power are fundamental forces that become expressed through persons and groups and other entities, that become manifested in the strong as heroic virtues and in the weak as ressentiment.   
5. Deleuze: Deleuze amalgamates ideas from Nietzsche, Spinoza, and Bergson, understanding becoming as a process through which desiring-machines create assemblages that constitute identities as temporary effects.  

In positing conflict and war as fundamental to creation, Heraclitus's model of Becoming exemplifies the way that early Greek thinking and political organization grew out of the role of the masculine warrior-hero.  Is there a way of conceiving of becoming in terms of regeneration rather than creative destruction.    


 in which the hthe way that 
 
 generation and a mode of generating ourselves that is not based on conflictual or battle or violence.  
 
 that is different about 
 
 destruction, death, violence, conflict and war as fundamental to creation, Heraclitus exemplifies the way in which early greek philosophical and political thinking drew from its origin from the barracks community that founded the early city states. Politics as a way of competing between people for supremacy and command. This patriarchal perspective perspective is also echoed in Aristotle's description of political.  In addition to the
It is important to note that, even in one of the foundational texts of political philosophy, there are already clues that point towards other possibilities. In the first lines of his treatise on Politics, Aristotle declares that the polis (city-state) is only one among several kinds of human koinon (community), another of which is the oikos (home) (1996, 1251b1ff ). Unfortunately, however, the analysis he offers of the home is the prototypically patriarchal one, a definition that has been influential throughout Western history. Not only does Aristotle claim that the home is encompassed within the state, but he also intersects these two communal spheres in the figure of the patriarch, who establishes his dominion over the domestic sphere through a process of domination and domestication, and who establishes the science of oikonomos (economy) to order the household and to acquire property (1996, 1253b1ff). However, Aristotle supplements this patriarchal analysis of the household with a secondary definition. The household is not simply the locus of domination, but more fundamentally, it is the association where people come together to attend to their everyday needs and wants, the communal space where people become companions through the activity of eating together (Aristotle, 1996, 1252b12–20).


Whether this idea of nurturance is already a part of 
 Instead of conceiving of 
 
 
 
  drew its philosophical and political thinking    and furthermore naturalizes a certain political relationship towards Heraclitus represents a translation of battlefield language to political and philosophical life as Greek  city-states emerged from the barracks community of fighters.
 In positing destruction, death, violence, conflict and war as fundamental to creation, and furthermore naturalizes a certain political relationship towards Heraclitus represents a translation of battlefield language to political and philosophical life as Greek  city-states emerged from the barracks community of fighters.
The Heraclitean explanation of becoming as a fundamentally grounded in conflict and collision of self-interested particles of self-interested elements conflicting through

The authority of the model of this mode of 
What concerns me about this is the idea that each of us is pushing our own goal without any 


In contrast to this understanding 
Instead of this I would like to talk about  a different form of the interaction of becoming that is the one taken from Levinas.  The importance of this is that it's not in the form of a war and it's not in the terms of an anonymous form of the nameless forces colliding with each other.  

Another way of conceiving of becoming in terms of regeneration rather than in terms of competition and power.  Here I am taking the work of Emmanuel Levinas as a 
our ancestor was certainly a “wild beast,” begotten of eris to terrorize the lethar-
gic, domesticated beasts that had lost their ferocity of mind and body. “Strife is
justice,” and “all things come into being and pass away through strife.” 26


Instead of this I would like to talk about  a different form of the interaction of becoming that is the one taken from Levinas.  The importance of this is that it's not in the form of a war and it's not in the terms of an anonymous form of the nameless forces colliding with each other.  

Levinas identifies two moments of interacting with the world, each of which 

First of all is the way in which the self emerges from the other people.  Levinas describes this as a metabolic moment.  The metabolism of being as a combination of the breathing and the eating.  A way that we make Levinas explains this as through two separate ways of description.  The first is what he calls nourishment, nourissement, which also means nursing from the world.  The eating is a mode of incorporation of the outside, the mode in which the outside becomes myself.  the world is not merely stuff that comes to us, but is already implicated in the other.  Our consumption is what reaches us through the intercession of other people.  When we have a commodity from the world, this reaches us as the product of someone else's labor.  We perceive this as the accumulation of other people as products as consumables.  the objectification of things and the production of objects.  These come to us as the alienated and objectified remnants of the life of others.  The way that we are composed of the other person in such a way that it is their death that constitutes our life.  The products that come to us are the alienated products.  We exist vampirically off of the remnants of the lives of others.  Life energy of the other person, of the laborer.  Marx has a running idea that it's not just a labor theory of value, where labor is already an abstracted commodity away from the person, but that the capiatalism extracts their labor power, that it is alreayd their life force being sacrificed for the production of our own needs.  

In a similar fashion, we can talk about breathing.  Our bodies are consist of the air that is the porduct of other people.  the air that was in our bodies is the oxygen that was in the bodies of other people and the air that is in our bodies will be the air of other people.  This air isn't just a part of us but it constitutes who and what we are chemically.  The air is not shared but is already somehow the substance of who I am is already the substance of the other preson's life

This separate existence of being oneself but that the housing that oneslef is already inherited and dependant on others.  It appears as if we are self related but actually our own autonomy is a retrospective illusion and a forgetting of the ways in which we are alreayd dependant of each other


Genetic moment of our relationships to others.  The way in which we are related to other people is already a birthing and a creation. Levinas already indicates this in his language for eating by saying that we are already creted from"nourishment" that this word is alreayd the idea of nursing.  that we are already the babies of other people.  The genetic relationship of time.  the other inherits the other's substance as something other than himself.  the carrying on of the substance of the past into the future.  That the person is other from the past but somehow still responsible and responsibe to what that past was.  The material of creation is the body that becomes mine and is birthed into mine . 

A genetics of being that means that its not just stuff but it's a materiality of birth.  It's common for thinkers to say that we are constituted by our "relations" but then it's also that we are related to other people.  We are constituted to people that we are unchosen and undesired.  This origin that we have and these connections that obtain between other poeple are not chosen and yet here we are somehow responsible to each other.  

The modern fantasy of the self-given law.  That the only thng that we can recognizes as authoritative is somehting that is chosen by us.  But rather that we are alaways somehow indebted to other people 

And a model of living that occurs thorgh out the world is that of the household or the oikos.  THe economic relationships that we make for each other is perverted by the idea of domination that is explored by Aristotle.  On the one hand, we have the idea that there is a household manager.  That the man is the person who is repsonsible for dominating needs and that it requires the person of the householder to control it and that the person that is the controller of the household and the one who then makes the way that the needs are controlled and that this is what requires a system of domination and control.  On the other hand the idea that the person is someone htat there is a meal tub fellows that it is a place where people gather together to meet their needs.  And that we are somehow constituted by and through our needs and that we meet together in the home.  The idea of the home and the social is that we nurturance  of each other.  bell hooks speaks of this in her essay on homeplace.  That the need for a home is a way that people retreat to in order to be healed and be taken care of 


This idea of maternity that is explored through the wrok of Sarah Ruddick.  The illusion that wer are dependent  but the fact that the world is somehow 

We can see this idea of maternity as reflected in the ideas of ecofemnism.  The idea of maternal practice as reflected in the work of Sarah Ruddick.  There is a threefold goal of the mohter which is namely to take care of the kid, to preserve the planet.  Ruddick presents the work of maternal practice as being threefold: 
  Ruddick defines the maternal standpoint not as an instinctive disposition or a specifically gendered role but rather as a set of practices that preserves the life of the child, nourishes their growth and prepares them for acceptance in the wider society.  Given that human infants are not physically or mentally capable of taking care of themselves for extended periods of time, the maternal practice that preserves human life is essential for both individual and collective survival

We also find this in Ariel Salleh who recommends that we do this for the planet as a whole 

Then we can talk about Sarah Hrdy.  Hrdy makes it clear that the key thing for our role is not the mother herself but also the entire community of what seh calls allomothering  




infanticide in sarah hrdy the dominant female kills children of lesser females

natural selection as expression of phenotype which is the combination of genetics and enviornmental or parental influences. 

genetic vs the biological mother.   biological nourishes nurtrues and provides the envornment in which infant develops both physically and psychologicaly

maternal effects can influence and speed the course of evolutionary change, gene frequency
Hamilton's rule: cost to organism < benefit_to_relative * relative_distance


for species such as primates, the mother is the environment .  how well she copes in the world is the greatest predictor of childhood outcome

identical genotype can develop into different phenotype expression

phenotypic flexibility means that evolution and speciation occur at much faster pace than otherwise possible

how much mother invests in child and what it learns about environment

maternal effects but not as genes

killing children who are not of their genetic line
how many survive and reproduce themselves

edward o wilson allomothers
allomother is an individual othr than the mother wehlping the mother care for her infmant (91 definition)

the most immediate environment of evolutionary relevantce for infants was the mother herself, not the physica or social world in pleiestocene humans and apes

mother was cradle protectio mobiliyy breakfas midmornintjuice lunch and dinner

must have lived near kin to providsion which is a very costly kid unti independant

female autonomy depends on support from kin
sex is not quesiton per se but lactation

prolactic the parenting hormone
even in birds
lactational aggression

pass infant to someone who will take care of it and return it
how much social support she has

lactation is world
the circumstances are conducive, almost any primate male can be induced to behave in a nurturing way.  The underpinnings for caretaking arc there; it’s just not expressed under ordinary circumstances. Why not?



the crown jewel of evolutionary thory, explain competitoin between males, poorly suted to explain preoccupation of females
guage their reproductuve efforts in line wieht resources and prevaling condiitons
her reproductive success depends not on muber of fertilizations but on the contingencies of her life, the qualities of the mates she cohooses and above al how successful she is at keeping alive such infants as she does produce

specialists Amy Parish and Frans de Waal point out, one reason bonobos do not engage in infanticide is because even though females do not remain among kin, the strong alliances that females forge with other females make mothers too formidable.14


Hence modern preoccupations with “how to marry a millionaire” strike me as recent, closer to ten thousand than to a million years old. Marrying for wealth is

as Marxist theorist Friedrich Engels pointed out years ago, was devised with “the express purpose” of producing “children of undisputed paternity.” By forcing wives to submit to husbands in order to gain access to resources under his control, patriarchal husbands translate ownership of the means of production into “ownership” of wives; “should the wife recall the old form of sexual life and attempt to revive

matrilineal society is not the same as a “matriarchal” one—the inverse of a patriarchal society in which powerful matrilines maintain public and private social control. Indeed, outside of myth, I know of no evidence that any matriarchal society ever existed. However, there is general agreement among anthropologists that women living matrilocally among their kin tend to have more autonomy than when they do not. Such women are likely to have many more opportunities to take advantages of devices such as the fiction of “partible paternity.” By contrast, the whole thrust of patriarchal societies is

If a Pleistocene father’s nagging source of anxiety lay in the past (just who did sire his child?), a mother’s stretched into the' future. Hers was a perpetual, existential angst about who would help provide for her children. Would her mate survive, stick

Part of the answer lies with a very special type of alloparent—postmenopausal females, former mothers who lived on not just for a few years, but for decades after their own last birth. Significantly, these older women gathered more food than they consumed. New information on just how much of this surplus postreproductive females may have contributed to the weaned offspring of others is changing the way some anthropologists think about the evolution of extra-long human childhoods.

by-product of an organism adapted for a long lifespan. “Grandmaternal” clocks set slow in anticipation of a long life arc looking like one of several reasons why selection for greater intelligence came at an evolutionary discount in our species.

mat. Mothers routinely combine work with mothering. Nevertheless it is beyond the capacity of new mothers to provide for their own needs plus those of older, still partially dependent children. They must rely on others to subsidize their survival. (Coartes/ f,l%Julcnu

such reasons, teenagers may he more available than they are diligent, proficient, or useful.

picking. Childcare is one of these lighter tasks, energetically far less demanding than hacking tubers out of rock-hard soil.

postreproductives forage on behalf of needy kin. When available, this rarest of all commodities, the postreproductive female, makes an ideal alloparcnt, assisting other mothers to protect or provide for their weaned offspring.

simultaneously more self-sacrificing and more heroic as they age.


most heroic to defend baby
Incredibly fit and wiry grandmothers, postreproductive women in their fifties and sixties, forage the longest hours, dig deeper for tubers, and spend more time gathering berries and processing food than any other category of forager.

predisposed to help kin, she channeled surplus food to recently weaned grandchildren because her own daughter (or perhaps her son or brother’s mate) had a new baby. Thus genes

Long lives, and with them long childhoods, would have altered the hominid equation. Small reproductive payoffs from being smarter would be sufficient to select for sapient brains in worlds where greater intelligence did not have to compensate completely for the enormous costs of delayed maturation. Of such lives one could confidently say, I grow slowly, therefore I think. I develop slowly, ergo cogito.

esposito exposito exposed one, the found
wet nursing

to explain maternal behavior is as a special case of Hamilton’s rule (see above, page 63) to explain altruistic acts between related individuals. Applied in this context, Hamilton’s rule is not so much about genes (after all, no one has any idea what is going on at the level of genes, or what mechanisms are involved) as it is about predicting when one individual should incur a cost on behalf of another. At this level, Hamilton’s rule is a formally organized metaphor for how natural selection shaped the economy of maternal emotions, with C being the cost to the donor, B being the benefit to the recipient, and r being the degree of relatedness:
locate affordable infant daycare, mercifully nine-to-five (not including weekends), and not nearly so wretched
Such foster mothers—who may be real or fictive kin—arc often postreproductive and are generally given the generic title “granny.” Across large areas of west, cast and southern Africa grannies
The logic of the lottery is explicit in the mind of the West African man who told her: “It is good to bring up or mind a lot of children because you don’t know which one will be successful.

that social support is forthcoming, probable costs and potential benefits are factored in. In humans, whose infants are so costly, and for whom conscious planning (thanks to the neocortex) is a factor, maternal investment in offspring is complicated by a range of utterly new considerations: cultural expectations, gender roles, sentiments like honor or shame, sex preferences, and the mother’s awareness of the future. Such complexities
security more than food

maternal habit of looking at the world from a child’s or an infant’s point of view.
4know, don't process random stimuli but seek out and fixate on specific patterns, like the components of a human face. They prefer

face). “When you add up all these innate preferences,” writes infant psychologist Daniel Stern in his beguiling Diary cifa Baby, “they almost spell FACE.”6

and leopards in the Old World, jaguars and mountain lions in the New. “Protection from predators is by far the most likely function of attachment behaviour,” wrote Bowlby.11 That attachment to mother keeps

in ancient Greece, show that children were intentionally targeted by stepparents, marauders from other groups, and even by competing mothers. Such practices did not necessarily end with the emergence of modern“civilization.” Millions
They accept as a given the proposal (which to many still seems bizarre) that members of their own species may be a threat to the survival of immatures.

The dawning realization that infanticide may have been a chronic threat

“shares every breath that its mother takes and every meal that its mother eats” to the post-Trivcrs view emphasizing a team composed of players who share some goals but not others. At their most sensationalized, these disparate maternal-fetal interests arc described as a “war in the womb.’>+° Omitted from this catchy sound-bite is the complex dialectical history of maternal, paternal, and fetal measures and countermeasures implicit in Haig’s evolutionary explanation for the perils and inefficiencies of gestation.


after much shorter intervals without compromising their own health or infant survival. Crudely put, mothers with good daycare had the highest fertility rates.

The key to the puzzle was the high rate of infanticide, which was occurring right after birth and in private.

much like infanticide, he is restating the anthropologically obvious. Almost all infanticide in traditional societies occurs right after birth, and is conceptually identical to late-stage abortion. 51
themselves that sickly babies were impostors left by goblins in place of healthy ones. The infant left behind became an erifant changé in France, a Wechselbag in Germany, in England a “fairy child” or changeling. In the best known versions from northern Europe, changelings were left overnight in the forest.

By endowing human infants with a long mother-centered primate heritage, by envisioning infants with special needs and mothers as creatures especially designed to satisfy them, and by situating an infant’s sense of security and self in the availability of this specially equipped mother, evolutionists like Bowlby and Trivers appeared to be imposing on women painful choices no man need ever make: her aspirations versus her infant’s well-being; vocation or reproduction.Twenty years later, I still return to this topic with trepidation.

FEMALE PRIMATES HAVE ALWAYS BEEN DUAL-CAREER MOTHERS, FORCED TO COMPROMISE BETWEEN MATERNAL AND INFANT NEEDS. IT IS PRECISELY FOR THIS REASON

children is very hard work, and you don’t get many rewards for it. I think that the role of parents has been grossly undervalued.. .. All the emphasis has been put on so-called economic prosperity.18

Bowlby identified years ago: a scarcity of motivated alloparents. How do mothers who go ofT foraging keep thedr immobile and vulnerable infants safe and secure? In many species, fathers are the co-caretakers of choice, as

majority of hunter-gatherer societies are characterized by close mother-infant proximity for at least the first several years.

about the inherent slack in the infant’s motivational system for seeking nurture; human babies can recognize but are not specifically imprinted on their mothers’ breasts, and seek nurture wherever they arc comforted and rewarded. Note, for example, how easily infants 

mothering. Only then did researchers give more thought to multiple caretaking. So long as it had been mothers carrying babies, as expected, alternative styles of caretaking weren’t considered.

tradeoffs in survival chances; if, as seems clear, maternal fitness can be enhanced by using allomothers, why haven't mothers been selected to use allomothers more?

chimpanzee mother who turns her baby over to its older sister risks having her infant eaten by a predator or killed by an infanticidal conspecific.


In the case of human foragers, mothers have trouble finding someone both willing and qualified to fill this role. Where there arc no infertile women or women past childbearing

The real constraint on working mothers has little to do with imagined ideals of Pleistocene motherhood, far more to do with locating and enlisting reliable, motivated, long-term allomothers. Human infants need mothers and allomothers to keep them warm, safe, mobile, stimulated, clean, fed, hygienically hydrated, and, most important, to communicate tenderly and responsively their commitment to go on caring. Hour by hour, supplying this kind of care is tedious.

Those who seek one-on-one infant care, but are not lucky enough to have kin to provide it, would do well to make it emotionally and materially worthwhile to their potential caregiver, that is, to beef up the “benefits” component in Hamilton’s

Under what circumstances can a mother safely afford to delegate care to allomothers? And, additionally: How can allomothers be motivated to care? Obstacles mothers face when they seek to go off

Mothers (we know from Boswell) were already abandoning infants in significant numbers.

term wretched derives from the Old English wrecche, for exile, literally a person without kin nearby, dehumanized by

As Harvard psychologist Marc Hauser likes to sum it up, what distinguishes humans from other apes is our “ability to put ourselves emotionally and cognitively in someone else’s shoes.”15

all the children she treated feared being killed by their parents and employed

Not because there is a “critical period” during which a mother either bonds with her infant or fails to, hut because her proximity is an essential first step to lactation and the ensuing processes that forge powerful tics between mother and baby. A mother

that infants strive for attachment to their mothers not only to stay close lest something pounce, but also to stave off the possibility of maternal retrenchment, and forestall it in any of the manifold forms it takes, ranging from mild negligence to abandonment. Babies are geared to making sure that maternal care is forthcoming and ongoing. Among humans, protection from predators comes as a bonus from maintaining this even more crucial attachment.

Robustness, plumpness, cuteness were not just useful physiological attributes. They were signals to the mother that the benifit function in Hamilton’s equation was well worth whatever cost it might entail for a mother to care for her infant.
